 
 
 
 
 
RENEWING OUR COUNTRY 
TOGETHER 
 
 
 
Budget 2005 
 
 
i 
CONTENTS 
Budget Speech 2005 
 
 
 
Page 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
1 
 
 
 
A Review of the Economy 
 
5 
i. 
Economic Growth 
- 
Introduction 
- 
Employment 
- 
Inflation 
- 
Foreign Trade and Payments 
i. 
Sectoral Developments 
- 
Manufacturing 
- 
Tourism 
ii. 
Economic Outlook 
iii. The Adoption of the Euro 
 
 
THE FIRST PRIORITY – Public Finance and Economy 
1. 
Fiscal Consolidation 
- 
The Concept of General Government 
2. 
Reducing Public Costs 
▪ 
Public Sector Reform 
▪ 
Managing New Recruitment in the Public 
Sector and cutting down on Administrative 
Costs as much as possible 
 
▪ 
Attacking Abuse 
- 
Kerosene 
- 
Sale of Duty Free Diesel 
3. 
Structural Reforms 
▪ 
Pensions Reform 
▪ 
Reform in the Health Sector 
 
 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
9 
9 
 
 
11 
11 
12 
12 
13 
 
 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
19 
20 
 
ii 
 
 
4. 
We continue to invest in the Country's 
Productive Sectors 
▪ 
We increase our Country's 
Competitiveness  
- 
Privatisation 
- 
Ports Reform 
- 
Public Transport Reform 
- 
The Social Pact 
- 
The National Plan for Research and 
Technological Development  
- 
Industry, Enterprise and Small 
Businesses 
- 
Incentives to Industry 
- 
The Services Industry 
- 
Tourism and Culture 
- 
Financial Services 
- 
The National Strategy on 
Information and Communications 
Technology 
- 
The National Action Plan for 
Employment 
 
 
THE SECOND PRIORITY – EDUCATION 
▪ 
Sport 
 
 
THE THIRD PRIORITY – THE ENVIRONMENT 
▪ 
Managing the Environment 
- 
A once-only Payment on the Purchase of 
Solar-heating Energy Savers and of Electric 
Cars 
- 
Recycling edible oil into Bio-diesel 
▪ 
The polluter pays principle 
▪ 
Agriculture and Fisheries 
▪ 
Road Improvements and Embellishment 
▪ 
Gozo 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
21 
21 
22 
23 
24 
 
25 
 
27 
28 
30 
35 
32 
 
 
33 
 
34 
 
 
36 
39 
 
 
39 
39 
 
 
41 
42 
42 
43 
44 
46 
 
 
iii
 
Fiscal Measures 
 
- 
The price of oil and its impact on the Public Costs 
- 
The price of gas 
- 
Cigarettes and Tobacco 
- 
Excise Duty on Mobile Telephony 
- 
Increase in the passenger departure tax on trips 
starting from Malta 
- 
Payment of Duty on Documents 
- 
Inherited Property 
- 
Transfer or Exchange of Movable Property and 
Shares between Companies in the Same Group 
- 
Poverty and Social Exclusion 
- 
Increasing Children's Allowance 
- 
Assistance to Parents of Children with Special 
Needs 
- 
VAT Refunds on Procurement by Persons with 
Disability 
- 
Assisting Couples with Disability who wish to 
marry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
47 
51 
52 
52 
 
53 
54 
54 
 
55 
55 
56 
 
57 
 
57 
 
58 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
59 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Mr Speaker, 
 
Last 1st May, our nation started on a new path towards new horizons 
that opened up with membership of the European Union.  We already 
live on a beautiful island.  We enjoy an advanced social set up with an 
excellent health system.  We have an able and hard working labour 
force and large and small enterprises that are able to compete abroad.   
We have a highly accessible education system for all and a unique 
history and cultural heritage. 
 
We may, therefore, be proud of what we achieved over the years.  But, 
we would be burying our head in the sand if we thought that our 
achievements overtime would, by themselves, be enough to guarantee 
to our future.  
 
The country is now facing stiff competition on all fronts.  Naturally, 
other countries, which for long years were considered as economic 
giants, are also facing the same problems.  All of them, without 
exception, are taking decisions that are necessary to retain their 
competitiveness and are currently going through reforms in all sectors 
of their society. 
 
Malta could not be an exception – even because it has now grown as a 
nation.  We have grown because we opened up our economy so that it 
can succeed in new markets.  We have joined a union of countries that 
have realized that unity brought strength and that together they make 
up an enormous economic force.  In our decision to join we integrated 
within a system wherein we could benefit from funding for the 
necessary reforms in everyone’s interest. 
 
I wish to emphasise the term ‘in everyone’s interest’.  If we remain 
inactive before these challenges and opportunities then we are bound 
 
 
2 
 
 
to lose. We must undergo change because it is both in our interest and 
that of future generations to do so.  As politicians, our electorate has 
trusted us to give direction to our country and not to be carried away 
by strong winds or strong waves. 
 
The budget that we present before Parliament has been drawn up 
precisely with this in mind. 
 
The government that I lead sees a renewed nation in five years’ time.  
What holds good today we need to do better by 2010.  We will have to 
change by 2010 whatever has to be changed.  The result for the 
country will be: 
 
- 
a strong economy that generates more and better jobs; 
- 
a financial situation that will allow for more development; 
- 
a sustainable social basis that guarantees a future with a health 
system of the highest order and an educational system that 
provides the best for our children; 
- 
an environment that provides space, air and cleanliness that 
the people deserve. 
 
We aim to continue building on the good work that was done during 
this year so that we will continue to address all those sectors that face 
us with different challenges and opportunities.  Our main targets are 
listed in Table 1, which I ask the House to take as read.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Table Nr. 1 
 
 
THE MAJOR CHALLENGES THAT GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO FACE WITH 
URGENCY, DETERMINATION AND COURAGE 
 
The Economic Sector 
 
- 
Economic growth and development: this means in practice a 
new approach in the tourism sector wherein we add value to 
other advantages that our country, and only our country, has, 
among them, its culture and its history; 
- 
attracting foreign investment to our shores mainly in those 
sectors that have better prospects in the global market; 
- 
competitiveness:  we provide all necessary support to small 
and medium sized enterprises by, among others, reducing 
bureaucracy and incentivising those who are creative and 
innovative; 
- 
we restore public finances by, among others, increasing 
productivity in the public sector, cutting down waste and 
increasing efficiency. 
 
 
The Social Sector 
 
- 
Implementing with haste the national plan on employment; 
- 
strengthening the family base by updating legislation and 
relevant polices; 
- 
putting social welfare on a sustainable path through decisions 
that emerge from dialogue; 
- 
protecting the environment by resolving the waste problem, 
improving public cleansing, among others, on our beaches, 
and reducing pollution everywhere. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Public governance 
 
- 
Government operates in a more compact way by strengthening 
the Cabinet Office; 
- 
the provision of public services would be more efficient and 
there will be more continual dialogue with the public through 
a more active role for each member of parliament and each 
councilor; 
- 
we make success in all aspect of our EU membership.  This we 
can do not only by maximizing benefits but also by giving our 
fair share in strengthening values in an ever-changing world 
both in the vision that ties the Mediterranean to Europe and 
also in man’s path towards a fairer society. 
 
In order to reach the end of the road that lies ahead of us w need to 
have faith in ourselves and the ambition for a better future for our 
children. 
 
We shall dialogue, listen and evaluate criticism - but we shall also 
decide.  It is only thus that we can renew our country.  My 
government has confidence in our people and is convinced that we 
face reality and take decisions with judgment and sensitivity so that 
we will secure a better future. 
 
The measures and initiatives that my government is announcing in 
this budget are all drawn with man at the center of all our political 
activity.  We want that everyone benefit from the opportunities that 
enable a person to acquire a holistic development.  Present realities 
demand from us these priorities: 
 
First:  Sustainable public finances and an economy that grows faster; 
 
Second:  Quality education for all; 
 
Third:  A beautiful, clean, and strong environment. 
 
 
5 
 
 
A Review of the Economy 
 
Now that the Maltese market is an integral part of the EU internal 
market, our priority is to look at the performance of our economy in 
this new reality. 
 
This is the first budget for this administration after the historic date of 
1st May 2004.  It was a historic date not only because on that day we 
renewed our European vocation by attaining full membership in the 
EU but also because, as from that date, my government provided a 
new direction for our country and opened up opportunities as never 
before for greater prosperity and improvement in the quality of life of 
all Maltese and Gozitans. 
 
In this process, we drew up a convergence plan that set our fiscal 
goals over a four-year period up to 2007, by which time we plan to 
have reduced the deficit ratio from 9.6% of GDP in 2003 to 1.4% of 
GDP in 2007. 
 
I am pleased to state that this year we shall be meeting our targets, 
that is, an imbalance in the Consolidated Fund of Lm94 million.  We 
will continue with determination towards meeting our targets for 2005 
by bringing down the deficit ratio to 3.7% of GDP. 
 
There are many determining factors in the attainment of these targets, 
among them the performance of the European economy in the global 
environment.  It is important for us, therefore, to examine the 
performance of the local economy in the context of what is taking 
place both in the EU economy and in the global economy.  This 
analysis is attached at Appendix ‘A’ with this Speech. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Economic Growth 
 
Developments in the international economic environment influence 
the performance of the local economy.  During recent years, the 
generally unfavorable economic environment and the ever-increasing 
competitive global developments continuously affected the Maltese 
economy. 
 
Following a small contraction in real GDP of 0.3% in 2003, the Maltese 
economy registered marginal growth of 0.6% in the first nine months 
of 2004.  In nominal terms, GDP expanded by 2.1% to £m1.4 billion.  
During the first three quarters of 2004, increases in real terms were 
recorded in all components of GDP.  Private and general government 
final consumption expenditure advanced in real terms by 1.2%and 
2.2% respectively.  A marginal increase of 0.6% was recorded in gross 
fixed capital formation.  Exports of goods and services in real terms 
advanced by 3.6% but the significant increase in imports of goods and 
services of 3.2% served to dampen the positive impact of the increase 
in exports on GDP growth.  It is pertinent to note that a drop in 
average export prices underpinned the increase recorded in real 
exports of goods and services. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
During the first three quarters of 2004, compensation of employees 
rose by 1.1% to £m647 million.  An average weekly compensation per 
employee in nominal terms stood at £m123.51, an increase of 2.0% or 
Lm2.43 over January-September 2003.  In real terms, average weekly 
compensation per employee declined by 0.8%. 
 
Household disposable income during the first nine months of 2004 
advanced by Lm7 million or 0.8 %.  Despite the higher disposable 
income, private final compensation expenditure increased by a larger 
 
 
7 
 
 
amount with the consequence that household savings declined to 
Lm21 million.   
 
Employment 
 
During the first nine months of 2004, the labour supply and the 
gainfully occupied population increased, thus reversing the trend 
recorded in the same period of 2003.  At the end of September 2004, 
the gainfully occupied population increased by 294 to 137,274.  
Meanwhile, unemployment continued to rise, albeit at a slower rate 
than that recorded in 2003.  Indeed, unemployed persons under Part 1 
of the Register amounted to 7,382, representing an increase of 149 
persons.  This translates in an unemployment rate of 5.1 %, marginally 
higher than that recorded in the same period of 2003 and, therefore, 
this Budget will be addressing a number of initiatives that will sustain 
our competitiveness and create more jobs in a more concrete form. 
 
In line with the trend noted in past years, the private sector, in 
particular private market prices, continued to be the main generator of 
jobs.  Meanwhile, public sector employment dropped further in the 
wake of restructuring, in particular, as a result of voluntary early 
retirement schemes in a number of public enterprises. 
 
 
Inflation 
 
In September 2004, the twelve –month inflation rate in Malta stood at 
2.57% when compared to 1.1% registered a year earlier.  As result, the 
cost of living adjustment for 2005 will amount to Lm1.75 per week. 
 
 
Foreign Trade and Payments 
 
The first nine months of 2004 were characterized by a marginal 
increase of 0.3% in export activity and an increase of 4.7% in total 
 
 
8 
 
 
imports. As a result, the trade deficit deteriorated by Lm43.1 million 
to Lm318.9 million. 
 
Higher total imports reflected a rise in imports of consumer and 
capital goods partly as a result of the removal of the remaining levies 
as well as higher capital outlays.  Similarly, imports of fuel rose on 
account of higher international oil prices. The restructuring process 
that the Maltese economy is currently undergoing was reflected in the 
export performance during the first nine months of the year.  
Consequently, during the January-September 2004 period, exports 
rose by Lm2 million over the same period of 2003. 
 
The current account deficit increased by Lm83.4 million to Lm144 
million during the January-September period.  This was attributed to 
an increase in profits by foreign-owned companies that led to an 
outflow of Lm37 million.  A decline in net interest receipts of Lm24.2 
million and an increase in net outflows of current transfers by Lm10.2 
million also contributed to the deterioration recorded in the current 
account during the first nine months of the year.  Tourism earnings 
increased by Lm6.7 million to Lm203.5 million during the January-
September period. 
 
 
Sectoral Developments 
 
Manufacturing 
 
The local manufacturing industry continued to face a challenging 
environment following further trade liberalization and the increasing 
cost-competition.  During the first nine, months of 2004, total 
manufacturing turnover declined marginally by 0.2%.  This 
performance reflects a decline in local sales of 4.9 % that was partly 
mitigated by an increase in exports if 1.2%.  In line with the trend 
noted in previous year, net investment in manufacturing continued to 
 
 
9 
 
 
register increases and reached Lm40.0million during the January-
September 2004 period. 
 
 
Tourism 
 
During the first nine months of 2004, tourist departures rose by 2.3% 
to 919, 728 above the level recorded during the same period of 2003 
and 2002.  Gross earnings from tourism stood at £m203 million, an 
increase of 3.5% over the comparable period of 2003.  In per capita 
terms, earnings rose by Lm2.50 to Lm221.30.  In the meantime, the 
number of cruise liner tourists declined by 31.7 % during the first nine 
months. 
 
 
Economic Outlook 
 
After registering a decline of 0.3% in real terms for 2003, GDP this 
year is expected to grow by 0.6% in real terms.  This marginal increase 
is mainly driven by an increase in exports of goods and services, while 
an increase in imports of goods and services is expected to dampen 
the positive effect of export growth on GDP growth.  In nominal 
terms, GDP is expected to increase by 3.0%.  For 2005, the Maltese 
economy is expected to grow by 1.5% in real terms and by 4.7 % in 
nominal terms.  The unemployment rate is projected to reach 5.8 % in 
December 2004 and 5.7 % in December 2005.  The twelve-month 
average inflation rate for 2004 is expected to reach 2.9% while for 2005 
prices are expected to increase by 2.4%. 
 
 
The Adoption of the Euro 
 
On accession to the EU, Malta is bound to join the Economic and 
Monetary Union.  The decision of when to join, however, is one that 
belongs solely to each member state according to its state of 
 
 
10 
 
 
preparedness for attaining the necessary conditions.  These are 
required in order to ensure that the member state is in a position to 
enjoy the benefits attached to membership in a monetary union. 
 
The process for adopting the euro depends on the extent that we 
succeed in reaching the goals in fiscal consolidation proposed in the 
Convergence Plan for years 2004-2007.  As already stated, I am 
pleased to state that we have attained our goals for this year as 
projected in the last Budget Speech.  With the further consolidation 
that we shall put in place next year, we will continue to satisfy the 
conditions to bring the Maltese currency in the exchange rate 
mechanism also known as ERM ll. 
 
More details on the performance of the economy are provided in the 
Economic Survey, a copy of which I am putting on the Table of the 
House. 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
THE FIRST PRIORITY 
 
Our aims are: 
 
1. That we secure fiscal consolidation so that we ensure that our 
country will continue to grow on a sustainable path and 
provides the necessary confidence for potential investors. 
 
2. That we cut down public expenditure by, among others: 
i. 
undertaking public sector reform as necessary; 
ii. 
managing new recruitment in the public sector and 
cutting down on administrative costs as much as 
possible; 
iii. 
attacking abuse; 
 
3. That we undertake structural reforms necessary to attain 
competitiveness; 
 
4 
That we continue to invest in our country’s productive sectors, 
increasing productivity, and consolidating infrastructure in 
order to attract investment, and creating jobs. 
 
 
1. 
Fiscal Consolidation 
 
At Appendix ‘B’, I am providing details on the current state of public 
finances.  As I already stated, this analysis evidently shows that we 
are gaining results from government’s efforts to control public costs 
and to start addressing some of the crucial reforms, so much so that 
we shall end up with a general government deficit of Lm98.5 million 
or 5.18% of GDP. 
 
In the same appendix, I provide an analysis on the impact of public 
investment on the economy.  I wish to stress that fiscal consolidation, 
together with political and financial stability, should add credibility 
 
 
12 
 
 
and confidence in the management of the economy and contribute 
towards its growth.  Investment will be attracted to our shores if we 
continue to be serious in our reforms.  Moreover, achieving these 
targets means that the country will keep its present high credit rating 
if not improve it. 
 
It would be crucial, therefore, for us to bring down the deficit as we 
plan to do in order to attract investment.  One cannot happen without 
the other. 
 
 
The Concept of General Government 
 
With our EU accession, we need to apply an accounting system that 
provides for a different concept for recording public finances from 
that we had in place so far.  Our current system provides only for 
recording government transactions of revenue and expenditure within 
the Consolidated Fund that is administered by the government. 
 
The Consolidated Fund balances, however, do not include the 
imbalances and debt of some of the public entities.  An example of this 
is the imbalance in the shipyard’s accounts, those of the local councils, 
etc. 
 
 
2. 
Reducing Public Costs 
 
Reducing public expenditure would allow resources to be employed 
more effectively on other areas and to be addressed towards pushing 
economic activity further.  Government is bound to explore ways, 
judiciously and analytically, of reducing costs wherever possible. 
 
Government is already working on three areas of initiatives that it will 
continue to pursue in the coming months. 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
2.(i) 
Public Sector Reform 
 
Public sector reform was not an easy process and it involved hard 
decision taking.  We are sensitive to the fact that there were those who 
were adversely hit but the results that we are achieving speak for 
themselves. 
 
There is still more work to be done.  However, we are having results 
wherever we have restructured.  This is the concrete way of 
addressing public expenditure, increasing productivity and helping 
the regeneration of the economy. 
 
Among the entities that have gone through the process of reform there 
are: 
 
- 
The shipyard, which will be recording a Lm1 million loss short 
of that originally forecast; 
 
- 
Gozo Channel Co, which has succeeded to cut down its losses 
from almost Lm1 million to about Lm27, 000 up to last 
September while increasing commuters by 50,000 passengers 
and cargo by 10,000 cars as compared with last year; 
 
- 
Public Broadcasting Services, which turned around an annual £m 
l million loss to end this financial year with a trading profit of 
around Lm200, 000; 
 
- 
Air Malta, which after its first year into restructuring is 
showing signs of recovery. 
 
The greatest satisfaction for our people is the fact that had we left 
matters as they stood, these entities would, this year, have absorbed 
subsidies from the people that would have totaled Lm20 million. 
These have now been saved not only for this year but also for any 
other following year. 
 
 
14 
 
 
The same Appendix ‘C’ will bear out the initiatives that government 
will be taking in the coming months.  All of them form an integral part 
of our strategy for 2005.   These are: 
 
- 
restructuring, and eventually privatizing, Sea Malta; 
 
- 
providing for a holistic reform in Enemalta Corporation for 
attaining an agency that would reflect the needs of its clients 
and those of the country; 
 
- 
implementing the report on the restructuring of the Malta 
Tourism Authority. 
 
Government, meanwhile, is carrying out an exercise to identify public 
entities that can be merged and thus cut down on costs, increase 
efficiency and reduce bureaucracy.  As I shall be explaining later on, 
government has decided to absorb the Restoration Center at Bighi 
within Heritage Malta. 
 
Some weeks ago, government announced the setting up of the 
Financial Management and Monitoring Unit.  Its brief is to provide 
adequate and effective monitoring on the costs of state agencies as 
well as on recruitment within them. 
 
This Unit will be able to use the facilities at the Management 
Efficiency Unit, the Internal Audit and Investigations Directorate, the 
National Office of Statistics, the Budget Office, the Treasury, and the 
Collective Bargaining Unit. 
 
Finally, our aim is not to impinge on management’s initiative but on 
the contrary, to ensure help and assistance for operations to be carried 
out at the highest possible standards. 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
2.(ii) 
Managing new recruitment in the Public Sector and cutting 
down on administrative costs as much as possible 
 
The second method of bringing down public costs is by undertaking 
specific measures over a period of time that will provide the desired 
results. 
 
- 
Government will pursue its current policy so that, wherever 
possible, retirees will not be replaced except in those instances 
where replacement is absolutely necessary so as not to disrupt 
essential services; 
 
- 
In addition to this measure there is also government’s other 
policy of maximizing use of its workforce.  Therefore, those 
who are deemed to be more useful or productive in other areas 
would be required to comply with any government’s directive 
to be assigned to other work.  This applies even more to those 
employees 
who 
have 
been 
identified 
as 
surplus 
to 
requirements and who have refused early retirement under a 
scheme. 
 
- 
Wherever possible, government will seek out opportunities to 
engage in public private partnerships.  The end purpose 
would be to attain a better product or a more efficient service 
at a lower cost. 
 
- 
Government, therefore, will be setting up a unit for this 
purpose within the Ministry of Finance in order to obtain the 
necessary expertise to develop various models for public 
private partnership implementation for specific activities. 
 
- 
For 2005, we do not intend to authorize government vehicle 
replacements except in those cases that will be authorized by 
Finance. 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
- 
Moreover, all performances bonuses for 2004 and for 2005 will 
be given on criteria that would look into achievements of 
financial targets set up for the department or the entity 
concerned. 
 
 
2.(iii) Attacking Abuse 
 
The third way of how we can possibly reduce public costs is by 
consolidating structures and current initiatives to cut down on abuses. 
The measures that we shall be taking in this direction are: 
 
- 
We cannot ignore the fact that there are those who do their 
best to avoid paying VAT on their purchases of goods and 
services.  We have tried various ways that depended on public 
cooperation but these were not so successful.  We shall, 
therefore, be introducing other ways by which a new property 
owner who applies for the installation of the water and 
electricity services will not only be required to seek a 
compliance certificate from the Malta Environment and 
Planning Authority (MEPA) but would also need to provide a 
statement signed by an architect that would show (a) the 
contractors’ names; (b) their VAT number, and (c) the amount 
of VAT paid on their services or the supplies.  This data will be 
given on a very simple form and, therefore, it will not be 
adding any beaurocratic process.  The information will be 
passed on to the Tax Compliance Unit for further analysis.  We 
shall also introduce a number of amendments in the relevant 
legislation that would provide for the collection of more data 
that concerns economic activity. 
 
- 
As from next year we shall yet again be addressing abuses in 
social benefits.  In recent years we successfully undertook an 
exercise to address abuse in the children's allowance scheme 
 
 
17 
 
 
and some other non-contributory benefits.  It is now time to 
reform the entire system for applying for invalidity pension. 
 
- 
We also intend to attack abuse of those in gainful employment 
while registering for work.  We shall introduce legislative 
amendments that would not allow those who are found to be 
in gainful employment while registering for work to continue 
to register as unemployed before producing evidence of 
having been in gainful employment for the first six months 
since registering after they had been made redundant from 
their job. 
 
- 
Moreover, those registering for work will be required to attend 
training courses that are run by the Employment and Training 
Corporation (ETC) and will be struck off from the Register 
upon refusal. 
 
- 
All of the above will be placed within comprehensive 
legislation on abuse and fraud that we plan to provide for next 
year. 
 
 
Kerosene 
 
This is another area of abuse.  Kerosene is very highly consumed in 
Malta.  One needs only mention that, last year 18 million litres of 
kerosene were consumed while, in the first nine months of this year, 
consumption already rose to 22million litres. 
 
We all know, however, that all these millions of kerosene 
consumption are not made for domestic purposes but are illegally 
mixed with diesel for engines.  Apart from being illegal, the fact that 
diesel carries excise duty while kerosene does not accounts for a 
difference in price of 16 cents per litre.  This is an incentive for abuse. 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
It is estimated that this illegal activity is costing Lm2.5 million 
annually to the exchequer. 
 
- 
With immediate effect, therefore, excise duty and VAT will be 
imposed on kerosene so that its retail price will be the same as 
that for diesel, that is, 34c.4 per litre.  I may as well say that its 
price on the international market is higher than that for diesel.  
Moreover, also with immediate effect, the retail price for 
kerosene will move with its price on the international market 
in the same way as those for other oil products. 
 
- 
However, in order for domestic consumers not to be adversely 
hit by this measure, government will be effecting a once-only 
payment of Lm12 by end March next year to all those who are 
entitled to social non-contributory benefits that are means-
tested, that is, old age pension, social assistance (including 
unemployment benefit, social assistance for women, social 
assistance for unmarried parents), sickness benefit, and special 
unemployment benefit. 
 
 
Sale of Duty Free Diesel 
 
- 
Government, through the Department of Customs, will be 
adding administrative controls in order to ensure that sales of 
duty-free diesel will be made only to those persons and 
organizations that are entitled at law.  This will be through in 
built systems that will secure such duty-free diesel from being 
sold illegally in Malta. 
 
- 
The Department of Customs, therefore, will be investing in 
electronic systems for the better control of duty-free sales of 
diesel while requiring recipients of these sales to install control 
systems that can be monitored by Customs. 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
- 
At the same time, there will be a change in the procedure s for 
duty-free sales.  Instead of the current system, all diesels will 
be sold subject to excise duty and reimbursement will be made 
to those who are exempt against a claim.  Reimbursements will 
be credited directly in the recipient’s bank account. 
 
These reforms should ensure a more equitable and fair systems, cut 
down on abuse, and increase revenue for government and in the 
meantime without reducing any of the benefits to those who currently 
enjoy them. 
 
 
3. 
Structural Reforms 
 
The third principle to strengthen the economy was structural reform.  
Here, I must explain that the aim was not simply to have a sustainable 
system but reforms were also aimed at guaranteeing systems that 
retained a high quality over a long period.  Our main interest was to 
see the economy responding to these reforms and also to give future 
generations those same guarantees that we enjoy. Under this chapter, 
there were three reforms: the pension reform, the health reform and 
the education reform.  I shall be dealing with education and other 
reforms later on in this Speech. 
 
 
Pensions Reform 
 
The time has now come to make another step towards pension reform.  
There is no need for government to repeat all its arguments for this 
reform. We only want to emphasize, however, that reform is 
inevitable.  It has to come some time or other as our current system 
will not be able to guarantee the adequacy of pensions and will not 
guarantee their sustainability for long. 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
Studies confirm that the longer it takes to address these challenges the 
more difficult it will be in the future.  Government is aware of its 
obligations to provide for future generations and, therefore, on the 1st 
June this year decision was taken to appoint a working group in order 
to look into all the report s that were recently made, including the 
important exercise that was carried out within the Malta Council for 
Economic and Social Development (MCESD) together with the 
Commission for Welfare Reform. 
 
These studies have now been completed and they include a number of 
recommendations and a list of decisions that needed be taken for 
reform to take place over a number of years.  This analysis has been 
reproduced in a White Paper that is now being published as part of 
government strategy for the coming five years and I am now putting a 
copy of it on the Table of the House. 
 
One hopes that this White Paper generates a constructive, realistic and 
mature debate that will lead us eventually to final decisions for 
implementation. 
 
 
Reform in the Health Sector 
 
Even here there is a lot of activity going on so that the necessary 
changes can take place without further delay in the health sector so 
that it will become a sustainable one for the country while it continues 
to provide its most urgent services that it is currently provides to 
whoever needs it. 
 
Last year, government announced its intention of setting up a health 
fund that would be a sub-fund of the Consolidated Fund and that it 
will be financed from social security contributions.  This decision has 
not yet been implemented as the heath contributions have not yet 
been apportioned.  This will depend on decisions that need to be 
taken on pension reforms. 
 
 
21 
 
 
Notwithstanding this, it is government’s intent to set up this health 
fund as planned. 
 
Even here, MCESD set up a working group made up of the social 
partners themselves in order to study experts’ submissions in this 
area. 
 
Government, as in the case of pensions, is committed to extend 
dialogue with all partners as much as possible, as is already 
happening, and will be, therefore, waiting for public reactions to all it 
was proposing. 
 
One hopes that, as in the case of pensions, it will not be long even here 
before we have the desired reforms by which we strengthen the sector 
and make it sustainable for the country’s financial resources without 
reducing its benefits to those who need them most. 
 
 
4. 
We continue to invest in the Country’s Productive Sectors 
 
As I explained earlier, the fourth aim that we need to attain in order 
for our economy to trust forward is to continue to invest in the 
productive sectors so that we attract industries that create jobs, 
particularly in manufacturing, tourism, the films industry, and other 
important sectors for our country and we lease life in all the 
productive sectors by giving more space to private entrepreneurship. 
 
 
We increase our Country’s Competitiveness 
 
Privatisation 
 
Privatisation is the fulcrum of our policy in order to reach our 
objective and targets we put for our country. 
 
 
 
22 
 
 
I, therefore, attach as Appendix ‘D’ details on our privatisation policy 
as well indications of our ambitious plan to which we are going. 
 
This plan includes the following initiatives on which we shall start 
next year and which will continue for the next three years: 
 
- 
we sell off all our shareholding in Interprint; 
- 
we will seek a strategic partner for Tug Malta so that 
government stakeholding in the company will be reduced to 
not less than 40%; 
- 
we sell off all our shares in Malta Dairy Products; 
- 
we sell off another 20% from government ‘s shareholding in 
Malta International Airport through an Initial Public Offering 
on the Malta Stock Exchange; 
- 
we sell off the three hotels that form part of the assets of Air 
Malta and we seek out a strategic partner for the management 
of Sterling Services Ltd as well as in Air Malta Supplies Co 
Ltd.; 
- 
we lease out to a strategic partner the oil storage facilities that 
Enemalta Corporation would have after it merges Malta Oil 
Bunkering Co Ltd in its operations and seek out a strategic 
partner for the production and distribution of gas. 
 
 
Ports Reform 
 
Our ports are the key to our economic development - development 
that is continually sustained by imports of consumer goods for our 
people and of raw material for our industry and by exports of our 
manufactured goods to foreign markets. 
 
Government, therefore, cannot but secure the efficiency in our port 
operations as well as ensure that the services provided by its 
operators are not costly in a manner that they erode the 
competitiveness of our economy. 
 
 
23 
 
 
Port reforms are aimed towards two objectives: first, the liberalization 
of the service of port operations where our competitiveness must 
ensure the best service at the minimum cost.  Second, improvements 
of existing facilities that ensure efficiency and demand. 
 
We started with the first stage when my government decided that, by 
the first quarter of next year, there would be a call for tenders for the 
management of port operations. 
 
Even here, national interest demands that the process goes forward 
and that all the necessary changes take place.  This is crucial if we 
really want to improve our competitiveness.  All our economic sectors 
will stand to gain from this reform but in particular the manufacturing 
sector that continues to underpin our economy. 
 
 
Public Transport Reform 
 
Government is committed to continue with reform in the public 
transport so that this would serve the needs of the public and, 
therefore, increase its use.  Last month, there was agreement with the 
Association of Public Transport on which further discussions are 
going on for its early implementation.   This agreement will form the 
basis for another agreement for the longer term up to 2009. 
 
The hike in oil prices adversely hit also public transport.  Since 1999, 
government had always carried the burden of such increases and with 
them also those for cost of living increases for the workforce in the 
sector. 
 
Studies are in progress in order to establish a schedule of routes that 
can be operated efficiently and viably.   For the sake of more 
transparency and accountability, government will continue to invest 
in the auto vehicle locator system that would provide a more efficient 
 
 
24 
 
 
and modern service.  This would also benefit those tourists who make 
use of our public transport. 
 
Government intends to pursue a policy by which subsidy payments 
would be linked solely to certification by the Authority that the terms 
of the agreed reforms are being observed. 
 
Government will also propose the introduction of other changes by 
which subsidies will not be based only on operational costs but also 
on the number of commuters using the service.  This would 
incentivise the better operations of the service so that it would attract 
more commuters than at present.  Where the number of commuters 
exceeds an established figure, then that part of the subsidy that would 
be linked to the additional commuters will be placed into a fund for 
more improvements in the service. 
 
Meanwhile, as agreed with the Association of Public Transport, 
government will be authorizing a 5c increase in fares with effect from 
1st January next year.  However, this increase will not include 
pensioners and the elderly. 
 
 
The Social Pact 
 
In order to better focus on our competitiveness, MCESD set up a 
working group from among the same social partners so that a set of 
measures can be drawn up for recommendations to government on 
how to increase competitiveness. 
 
The Council was discussing this plan to bring about a social pact that 
would have been agreed upon by all the parties.  We now know that 
agreement was not reached – a development, however, that should 
not discourage us from taking decisions that need to be taken. 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
The social partners acknowledge the need to increase competitiveness 
and productivity in our economy.  It is only thus that we can attract 
investment that we badly need to secure our jobs and create new ones. 
 
Among the measures that I have already mentioned there are a 
number of initiatives that have been discussed within MCESD, 
particularly those related to the registering of unemployed persons.  
There are other measures that are being discussed within MCESD that 
I will mention further on in my Speech and which are related to 
education and the National Action Plan for Employment. 
 
Government, however, deems that by themselves these are not 
enough to leave an impact on productivity and competitiveness.   
Therefore, government decided that public holidays that fall on a 
Saturday and on a Sunday would not be added to vacation leave.   In 
practice this means that for 2005 the productive sectors will gain an 
additional 4 days of work. 
 
 
The National Plan for Research and Technological Development 
 
Research and innovation is another challenge that is facing us in our 
efforts to secure competitiveness in our industry and improvement in 
our quality of life. 
 
It is encouraging to see the private sector, particularly the 
manufacturing, becoming even more aware of the need for further 
investment in research and innovation towards more competitiveness. 
 
Government has already recognized this and is already giving 
incentives.  The main one is reductions from company tax as high as 
150% on the amount spent on research.   Nevertheless, the definition 
of research that is given in the tax law is somewhat restricted. 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
This is a sector that has great potential for growth.  For this to happen 
we must first review the national framework of all those involved in 
this area and we need to help those who are wiling got exploit this 
potential. 
 
Therefore, government is announcing the following measures: 
 
- 
By the end of January 2005, government will decide which 
entity is responsible for the sector.   Those involved at present 
are the Malta Council for Science and Technology (MCST), the 
University of Malta and Malta Enterprise.   This will not 
include initiatives being taken by the industrial sector or by 
private companies or individuals.   For this exercise, it is 
important to allow room for the contribution of the private 
sector; 
 
- 
We will increase the tax exemptions from 150% of actual 
spending to 200%; 
 
- 
The definition of research and development will be extended 
under the tax law.  Capital expenditure will not be limited to 
investment in plant and machinery but will also include 
acquisitions, such as property, to be used for research; 
 
- 
We will include wages and study fees paid by employers on 
behalf of employees studying for a Masters or a PhD in areas 
to be specified with established universities and learning 
institutions; 
 
- 
We will give a 50% discount on the social security 
contributions paid by employers for three years on behalf of 
employees who have a Masters or a PH.D in areas to be 
specified. 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
Industry, Enterprise and Small Businesses 
 
One of our main aims is to create commercial activities with high 
value-added. 
 
A considerable proportion of the work force does not have the 
required skills and we must create work for this social group.   
Concentrating on high value-added activities might risk creating an 
imbalance among those seeking work. 
 
Up to last month, Malta Enterprise had approved 56 projects with a 
global investment of Lm34 million over a three-year period.  Eleven of 
these projects are in printing, with a total investment of Lm7 million.   
Another seven are in the pharmaceutical industry with a total 
investment of Lm15 million. 
 
There is also considerable activity in the area of small enterprises.  
About 1300 persons have been trained.  Last May, we opened a new 
training center in Gozo that has already organized 11 events.  A total 
of 110 businesses have benefited from 2 support schemes while 
another 100 will have benefited by the end of the year. 
 
An agreement is being reached with the European Investment Fund 
for guarantee facilities.  Help is being given to small enterprises that 
want to start up.  This is being done through the Business Incubation 
Centre in Corradino where 25 businesses are receiving help. 
 
There is need for more help for business in Malta.  Businesses the 
backbone of the economy, generating spending and consumption that 
drive the economy. 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
Incentives to Industry 
 
Industry is another pillar of the economy.  We need to support and 
strengthen it as much as possible.  The incentive should not only look 
at what has been achieved over the years but also at the business that 
we want to attract to Malta. 
 
- 
Therefore, I am pleased to state that this year government has 
allocated Lm1,850,000 by way of assistance to industry under 
the Business Promotion Act. 
 
- 
Another amount will be allocated to the Malta Industrial Parks 
Ltd for other measures connected to the construction of 
factories and to the maintenance of industrial areas. 
 
I want to emphasize once again that this is one of our major priorities. 
Therefore, the allocation of Lm1,850,000 will be supplemented by a 
number of fiscal measures aimed at specific sectors that the 
government feels require help. 
 
There is a huge demand for new factories which are more 
sophisticated or which are to be custom built.  The demand already 
reached Lm17 million.  Therefore, another way has to be found to 
finance existing demand as quickly as possible to invest in new 
factories.  Malta Industrial Parks Ltd will, therefore, consider the 
possibility of using a model that has already been successfully used in 
the construction of new schools and will go for private financing. 
 
In the area of back office industry we will organise, through ETC 
training courses for employees in this field.  We are also preparing 
fiscal incentives to tighten the cost burden of those who employ these 
workers as well as to reduce the capital costs of those who want to 
start operating here. 
 
 
 
29 
 
 
We believe that Malta has the geographic potential to serve as a base 
for storage and distribution throughout the Mediterranean.  We are 
looking at those parts of Malta could be free trade zones in accordance 
with the European customs rules.  We are also drawing up a package 
of fiscal incentives to help capital investment in that sector. 
 
As the government has repeatedly stated, we consider the 
involvement of small enterprises to be crucial.  We plan to increase the 
amount of assistance given to this sector. 
 
In the 2003 Budget Speech we had extended the incentives to small 
enterprises to those which employed 5 persons and which had a 
turnover that did not exceed Lm250, 000. 
 
These incentives were: 
 
- 
spending on information technology would be deducted from 
last year’s profits; 
 
- 
small enterprises will be refunded VAT within 30days of the 
declaration as long as the returns are submitted on time; 
 
- 
government will extend these schemes from companies that 
employ less than 6 full timers to companies that employ 11 full 
timers.  Apart from this, apprentices and students will no 
longer be counted as full time employees so that more 
companies could benefit from these incentives. 
 
It is important that we make an effort to increase access to risk capital 
to those with good ideas.  Our economy will not grow if, in order, to 
start a project, you need to raise capital from bank loans that is 
secured by property.  Our competitors are growing because their 
private investors are ready to invest in new commercial ideas.  
Government will, therefore, invest Lm900,000 over a three-year period 
to set up a Venture Capital Fund.  To encourage this investment, each 
 
 
30 
 
 
investor will get a tax credit on part of the capital and a partial 
exemption on the capital generated by the investment.  We are doing 
this because we believe that it is crucial to have a source of financing – 
but it will not succeed unless we attract private capital. 
 
Government will introduce a one-off scheme to give businesses the 
chance to regularise their pending VAT bills, exempting them from 
fines as long as they pay their arrears and interests within a timeframe 
to be established. 
 
Government wants to attract more cinematic and television work.  We 
want to have a regular momentum of productions that will generate 
more jobs in this sector.  We will, therefore, introduce incentives to 
increase our competitiveness.  Fiscal incentives will take the form of 
tax reductions for capital investment connected to infrastructure, 
equipment and approved facilities, refund of VAT and of social 
security payments paid in Malta, and a 20% tax cut on certain 
expenses which have more than 50% value-added. 
 
 
The Services Industry 
 
Tourism and Culture 
 
Tourism is one of the main pillars of the economy.  It requires an 
effective and collective effort to strengthen it. 
 
Government is aiming for an increase of between 100,000 and 150,000 
tourists by 2006 - 2007, an increase of 50,000 a year for the three 
coming years with more occupancy in 5-star accommodation. 
 
Government has decided that its strategic policy for tourism should 
address two aims.  The first is to keep the market share of tourists 
who visit Malta to enjoy the sun and the sea and who book through 
established tourist agencies and specialized tourist operators.  The 
 
 
31 
 
 
second is to dedicate more financial resources and marketing efforts to 
attract tourists in the following categories: 
 
i 
 
Cultural tourism 
ii  
Sport tourism 
iii        
Language learning tourism 
iv  
Conference tourism 
v            
Gozo as tourist destination 
vi            
Other niches such as cruise and stay, health and 
retirement, short brakes,  agro tourism, gastronomy, 
events and yachting. 
 
- 
There is a close link between our heritage and the tourist 
product that we offer.  It is, therefore, doubly important that 
we boost restoration and conservation of our heritage.  With 
this aim, government is increasing the allocation to Heritage 
Malta by Lm400, 000 to Lm1,650,000 and in addition it will 
keep the Lm1million revenue it generates. 
 
- 
As part of our policy to improve our product in the coming 
weeks, government will take a decision on golf courses in 
Malta and Gozo. 
 
- 
Moreover, as I shall state later on, we shall be allocating an 
additional Lm100,000 to draw a schedule of restoration and 
conservation of the Ġgantija temples to improve the tourist 
product in Gozo. 
 
- 
The Malta Tourism Authority vote for next year will be Lm8 
million.  Government will allocate an additional Lm500,000 
during the year if established additional arrival figures are met 
through its operations.  This will introduce the concept of 
performance-related targets even in these entities. 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
- 
In the meantime, government is maintaining the 5% VAT rate 
on hotels and will be drawing up a scheme of refunds for part 
of the VAT paid on international conferences held in Malta. 
 
- 
We believe that the time has come to consolidate our 
structures.  In order to create more synergy, the Restoration 
Centre at Bighi will be falling under the responsibility of 
Heritage Malta.  It will retain its academic aspect through the 
courses organised at the University of Malta or the Malta 
College of Arts, Science and Technology (MCAST). 
 
- 
In order to continue to incentivise the protection of our 
heritage we will exempt from tax, at established levels, 
donations to museums, or to Patrimonju Malti and will give 
fiscal incentives to those who undertake restoration work on 
historic buildings. 
 
- 
We want to encourage musical talent. As from next year, 
practicing or studying musicians including that at band clubs 
will be entitled to a refund of 15.25% of the cost of their 
musical instruments. 
 
 
Financial Services 
 
The financial services sector was another area that continued to 
expand and provide more employment opportunities and opening up 
new horizons for firms operating in the sector.  Malta’s legal, 
regulatory, and policy framework continued to develop dynamically 
with the needs of a modern financial sector that is becoming 
increasingly international in its outlook and orientation. 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
Following the introduction of the new law on trusts and trustees, the 
next step will be to introduce a law on securitisation.  In the coming 
year, we intend to give this sector top priority.  In 2005, government 
will submit the Bill to Parliament in consultation with the sector. 
 
Government will continue to act in the sector in accordance with the 
EU directives in its relations with the companies that have 
international trade.  At the same time, Malta insists that it will defend 
its right to sovereignty when it comes to matters of taxation, and 
whilst it will continue to follow the procedures of the Code of 
Conduct Group, the use of a system of full imputation system of 
taxation will be retained.  In this way, shareholders will be credited in 
full with the imputed tax on distributed profits from company 
dividends. 
 
 
The National Strategy on Information and Communications Technology  
 
Over the past three years, government has made it a top priority to 
increase the efficiency of the public service through the use of IT.   
Government believes that this adds value to the services and will 
make it more efficient and productive for both the private sector and 
the general public.  Government, therefore, launched an ICT strategy 
for the coming three years.  This ambitious project will improve the 
lives of the Maltese. 
 
The strategy aims at getting 90% of the private sector connected online 
to public services by the end of 2006.  In this way exporters can use 
government services electronically. 
 
This improvement in ITC in the public sector should encourage 
industry to improve its own efficiency and productivity. 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
This strategy aims at having 50% of the Maltese who use internet able 
to access public services electronically by the end of 2006. 
 
Here, one should mention that a project that was started four years 
ago in schools would be completed this year with no fewer than 5000 
computers installed and an e-mail address for each student.  This 
augurs well for a future generation that will be familiar with the use 
of IT and sufficiently trained in its use. 
 
The strategy is aimed at broadband connections for 60% of the 
Maltese internet users by the end of 2006. 
 
Also by the end of 2006, Malta will have excellent facilities in ICT to 
be able to meet the needs of foreign investors. 
 
We also believe that Maltese companies, even, small ones, have the 
potential to flourish globally, as long as they know how to use IT and 
internet.  Therefore: 
 
- 
We are offering incentives to companies who create or 
improve e-commerce and e-business systems as well as those 
invest in technology to improve their productivity; 
 
- 
apart from this, we will create also a trust mark scheme so that 
those who buy over the internet from Maltese companies that 
are certified under this scheme can be reassured that they are 
buying a legitimate product and that the transaction is secure. 
 
 
The National Action Plan for Employment 
 
In order to help the economy and create jobs, government is giving an 
additional Lm1 million for various measures under the National 
Action Plan for Employment (NAP) that has been published and 
given to the Honourable Members.  A few days ago, the House 
 
 
35 
 
 
approved the Estimates of the ETC which already had Lm2.6 million.  
Together with Lm1.5 million in funds for various projects under the 
European Social Fund and Lm1 million under NAP, ETC will now 
have over Lm5 million for its services and programmes. 
 
The National Action Plan for Employment provides for a total of 81 
measures coordinated between the various government agencies and 
departments, mainly ETC, Malta Enterprise, the Ministry for Gozo, 
Tourism and the educational sector. 
 
Among these are: 
 
- 
Measures that are as personalised as possible to help persons 
find work. 
 
- 
Mandatory measures for those who are registering for work to 
follow training and employment schemes, including a 
traineeship of between 13 and 52 weeks in a sector depending 
on the needs of the job-market as well as in community work.  
Under some of the schemes, employers will be given grants or 
subsidies amounting to half the minimum wage or salary for 
the period of training / employment or for part of it. 
 
- 
Training and Deployment Exposure Scheme: a project that is 
financed with assistance for the EU Social Fund aimed at 
training 400 persons aged 40 and over who are currently 
registering for work to give them training and employment 
that reintegrates them into the labour market. 
 
- 
A Childcare project will provide training and a package of 
incentives to companies to set up and run a child care facility 
for its employees. 
 
- 
A Supported Employment Scheme that will support persons 
with disability who register for work.  ETC will provide 
 
 
36 
 
 
temporary or permanent support through job coaching, 
personal assistance and financial incentives for employers. 
 
- 
A special project for Gozo to provide help to small companies, 
training for those who wish to set up on their own, intensive 
courses in tourism and other measures for those registering for 
work. 
 
- 
Until now full time employees or a self-employed persons 
were eligible for a fixed income tax rate of 15% on secondary 
employment, up to maximum of £m3000.  As from 1 January, 
2005 a couple that is opting for joint tax computation will also 
have the right to benefit from this. 
 
- 
As from 1st January 2005, women who have been absent for 
more than five years from work, will be exempt from tax for 
the first year during which they return to work. 
 
 
THE SECOND PRIORITY – EDUCATION 
 
Government has long recognized that education is vital for every 
development.  The development implemented in all sectors of the 
education system has been yielding good results that are crucial for 
the country’s economy and for the social and cultural development of 
the people.  The number of young people and adults continuing their 
studies after obligatory education has never been so high and the 
country needs many more men and women with the highest possible 
development of their intelligence and talents. 
 
For next year, therefore, for education alone, government is estimating 
an investment of Lm103 million.  This recurrent and capital 
expenditure will be Lm13 million higher than that approved for this 
year. 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
A critical analysis of this sector would show w that the strategies and 
policies that had been followed over the last 15 years have borne fruit 
without which we could never have reached our present quality of 
life.   There is now an urgent need for a renewal of the entire 
education system to ensure quality and standards.  For this reason, 
government will continue to give the highest priority to the sector: 
 
- 
Government assumes that everyone in Malta agrees with this 
priority and that everyone was prepared in the diversity of 
ideas to look at education from the national interest and 
common welfare point of view.  This national agreement 
should be the basis for the widest consensus on the reforms 
needed in the sector. 
 
- 
Government was giving a new look at early education from 
birth.  Government believed no one could or should replace 
the parents in the upbringing and education of their children. 
But, where parents cannot do otherwise, as well because of 
increasing work commitments, they need to entrust their 
children in care centers. 
 
- 
Government will also be regulating the quality of these 
facilities so that the children’s safety, care and educational 
development would be ensured. 
 
- 
Government also intends to improve and strengthen the 
management and the quality of state primary and secondary 
schools.  Government believes that an important step in this 
direction is more autonomy in an agreed framework of 
management of state schools. 
 
- 
Towards this end, government will start by allocating 
Lm200,000 
specifically 
to 
launch 
the 
programme 
of 
educational reform.   In the near future, a document will be 
 
 
38 
 
 
published for a full debate on restructuring proposals for the 
education system. 
 
- 
Government knows how crucial are the schools’ structures, 
facilities and environment.  We would remain committed to 
building and modernising all state schools.  A capital sum of 
Lm3.2 million was being allocated to the Foundation for 
Tomorrows’ Schools (FTS) and for information technology 
equipment in state schools.  With the existing financial 
arrangements between government and the Foundation, it was 
expected that the investment programme in building and 
modernizing schools during 2005 will amount, in all, to over 
Lm6 million. 
 
- 
Government was also proposing Lm11.5 million for Church 
schools.  This was Lm1.25 million more that the amount voted 
last year. 
 
- 
The post secondary, vocational and tertiary sector presented 
particular challenges.  Though many were continuing their 
studies after the age of 16, Malta still badly needed more.  The 
policies of the past 15 years needed to be maintained, updated 
and reformed. 
 
- 
For next year an extra Lm2 million were being proposed for 
the recurrent vote of the University, Junior College and 
MCAST to a global amount of Lm17 million. 
 
- 
Government would also be investing capital expenditure of 
Lm720,000 for the University and Lm900,000 for MCAST. 
 
Moreover, almost Lm9 million were being voted for maintenance 
grants for students in post-secondary, vocational and tertiary sector.  
Government, however, wants now to renew the institutions and 
create a new financing order for the future, for the University, 
 
 
39 
 
 
MCAST, Institute for Tourism Studies (ITS) an the entire post 
secondary sector, including the financial support for students.  
Government, therefore, will be setting up a National Commission of 
Higher Education to better implement the necessary reforms and has 
already taken steps for a new zero-based budget system, for recurrent 
and capital expenditure for a three years. 
 
Apart from a new financial base for the sector, government would be 
introducing a new verification and evaluation system so that all 
would give a full account of the quality of their work and their results 
and of their expenditure. 
 
 
Sport 
 
Sport activities are an integral part in this scenario. 
 
- 
The Sports Council, therefore, would be getting Lm1.3 million.  
Plans and documents for tenders would be finalised for the 
construction of a regional sports complex near the school being 
built in the limits of Kirkop. 
 
- 
Moreover, the Council has been directed to develop a public 
private partnership so that a regional sports complex would be 
designed and built in the north of Malta. 
 
 
THE THIRD PRIORITY – THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
Managing the Environment 
 
The progress of a country cannot be measured only in financial terms 
but also in terms of the quality of life.  In order to ensure the quality of 
life and to make our place even more beautiful, together with our 
competitiveness, we must also improve our environment. 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
Many efforts were made this year to improve the environment and to 
ensure that all those working in this sector would do so in a 
coordinated manner so that environmental improvement would be 
thought out and developed in a strategic manner.  In this way we 
would ensure that all these efforts would be aimed at environmental 
priorities of our islands in line with our other international 
commitments. 
 
Environmental priorities over the coming years would bring about 
change in, among others, waste management, the quality of air and 
water and biodiversity. 
 
- 
About Lm13.8 million will be invested in the necessary 
facilities over the coming three years.  These facilities would 
treat domestic refuse and that generated by commercial and 
industrial plants.  The EU would finance about 75% of this 
investment but this would not include the recurrent 
expenditure to manage these facilities. 
 
- 
During 2005, government would be awarding contract to 
strengthen some sides of the dumpsites that are weak and to 
collect the gases emerging from the Maghtab, Qortin, and Wied 
Fulija dumpsites.  Fires would be doused and the rehabilitation 
process would start. 
 
- 
In the meantime, government would be extending the 
initiatives for waste separation.  There would be more bring-in 
sites and sites would be developed to receive bulky refuse.  
There would also be EU help for this. 
 
Large industrial works would be undertaken in water treatment next 
year. 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
- 
Two plants for wastewater treatment will be built, in Gozo and 
one in the north of Malta.  The Gozo plant will be costing 
Lm1.7 million of which Lm1.3million would be financed under 
EU pre-accession funds.  The Malta plant in the north would 
cost Lm5 million, three quarters of which would be financed 
under the 5th Italo-Maltese Financial Protocol. 
 
Another sector being dealt with to lessen the environmental negative 
effects on health, air and water quality monitoring was in hand and 
the aim was that in a short time there would be three air-monitoring 
centers. 
 
As for biodiversity, the EU and the United Nations had helped to 
identify about 26 sites in Malta and 10 in Gozo, apart from Comino,   
St Paul Islands and Filfla where nature would be protected and there 
would be also the first marine protected area. 
 
Malta had ideal weather conditions for the generation of alternative 
energy such a solar and wind energy.  The Resources Authority was 
drawing up policy on alternative energy.  A draft of this energy policy 
based on our obligations with the EU was already in place.  This 
policy should lead us to identify the best way forward. 
 
 
A Once-only Payment on the Purchase of Solar-heating Energy 
Savers and of Electric Cars 
 
Another concrete step for other sources of energy was the installation 
of solar water heaters.  In the Budget for 2001, government had 
lowered VAT from 15% to 5% on alternative energy equipment.  But, 
in May 2004, in line with EU regulations, the VAT rate was restored to 
the highest rate, that is, 18%. 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
- 
With effect from 1st January, government would be refunding 
an amount equivalent to 15.25% of CIF value, up to Lm50, on 
the purchase by a household of a product using solar energy. 
 
One should here mention that the Enemalta Corporation is already 
providing another incentive through free installation of the electricity 
mains in new houses where solar heaters and solar panels were 
installed. 
 
- 
Also, with effect from 1st January, in the case of electric cars, 
government would be refunding an amount equivalent to 
15.25% of the value of the car up to Lm500. 
 
 
Recycling edible oil into Bio-diesel 
 
As a way of protecting the environment, government was seeking 
alternative source of energy.  One of these sources was bio-diesel, a 
product made from edible oil and lard collected from the catering 
industry and of the remains of animals slaughtered at the abattoir. 
 
This material is processed and mixed with gas oil producing bio-
diesel.  20% of the final product is from this source. 
 
The use of this source achieved two main objectives: first, that these 
oils and lard would not be dumped, and second, when used, they do 
make emissions that pollute the air and harm our health. 
 
Government intends, therefore, to exempt from excise duty that 
component of bio-diesel, that is, 20% of the final product. 
 
 
The polluter pays principle 
 
 
 
43 
 
 
The total cost for waste management would be partly funded by the 
EU, partly out of public funds and partly by funds generated out of 
the eco-contribution. 
 
As announced in last year’s Budget Speech, the eco-contribution has 
now been introduced on a number of products. 
 
Government was now moving towards another phase of the same 
regulations with the setting up of a technical commission to 
administer these payments. 
 
We are aiming for importers and producers to create schemes for 
consumers to return product containers to their source.  If they 
assume this responsibility with the greatest commitment and 
efficiency they will be exempt from the payment of the eco-
contribution.  Once these schemes are well managed, the Maltese 
industry will benefit from the market advantage that effective 
environmental management brings about. 
 
It was estimated that waste management and environment protection 
costs next year would double from Lm3 million to Lm6 million.  
Therefore, as from January 1st, the list of new products on which the 
eco-contribution would be paid will be extended to include plastic 
bags and containers of products and objects that leave an impact on 
the volume of waste generated in our country.  Revenue from this 
increase of the eco-contribution next year is expected to go up to     
Lm2 million. 
 
The new products subject to eco-contribution will include plastic bags, 
plastic containers for shampoos, toothpaste, and washing liquids, 
mattresses, shotgun cartridges and ammunition; plastic items used in 
the kitchen, chewing gum and number of electronic products. 
 
It was worth noting that around 52 million plastic bags were used 
each year, most of which were thrown away. 
 
 
44 
 
 
 
Following the closure of Maghtab and the Fulija waste fills in Malta 
and the Qortin dumpsite in Gozo on May 1st, Malta had now to invest 
heavily in the building of modern facilities to process the waste 
generated every year. 
 
 
Agriculture and Fisheries 
 
In the agricultural sector during the 32 months up the end of 2006, 
Malta will be implementing a Lm15 million programme, Lm12 million 
of which will be funded under the European Agricultural Guidance 
and Guarantee Fund.  The remaining Lm3 million will be paid out of 
own funds.  One had to understand that investment in this sector was 
also directed towards the environment.  These funds would go 
towards financing priorities that include: 
 
- 
the modernisation of agricultural sectors which have to do 
with quality and competitiveness by both farmers and 
producers; 
- 
the promotion of modern production methods which did harm 
to 
the 
environment 
while 
they 
protected 
the 
rural 
environment; 
- 
the implementation of the development plan for the 
agricultural sector. 
 
Government was also investing in the fisheries sector through EU 
assistance so that fishermen would modernise their craft. 
 
Further details may be found in Table 2 with this Speech, which I ask 
the House to be taken as read. 
Table No. 2
MEASURE
SOURCE
TOTAL                          EU
PUBLIC FUNDS
Producers' Groups 
EAGGF
1,350,000
1,080,000
270,000
Agri-Environment
EAGGF
4,800,800
3,840,640
960,160
Less Favoured Areas
EAGGF
6,000,000
4,800,000
1,200,000
Ad hoc Measures
EAGGF
7,400,000
5,920,000
1,480,000
Meeting Standards
EAGGF
6,064,200
4,851,360
1,212,840
Technical Assistance 
EAGGF
1,285,000
1,028,000
257,000
State Aid Complement
EAGGF
6,725,000
5,380,000
1,345,000
TOTAL
33,625,000
26,900,000
6,725,000
EUROPEAN AGRICULTURE GUIDANCE AND GUARANTEE FUNDS 2004 - 2006
ALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
 
 
46 
 
 
Road Improvements and Embellishment 
 
I cannot fail to mention also a major road improvement programme 
costing Lm14.4 million every year that was now under way.  
Government continued to be committed to improving towns and 
villages through embellishment projects and Lm2.4 million were 
being allocated as capital expenditure for this purpose.  Lm200, 000 
were being allocated for the purchase of equipment so that employees 
at the Works Department Division could be better able to perform 
their work. 
 
 
Gozo 
 
All the measures I had mentioned previously are all related directly or 
indirectly to Gozo.  However, government retains that Gozo needs 
particular attention. 
 
Government has three priorities: 
 
- 
to reduce as much as possible peripheral and double insularity 
problems; 
- 
to strengthen the island’s economy; 
- 
to reduce the social fragility of the Gozitan community. 
 
Among the concrete measures that have to be taken in Gozo are the 
following: 
 
- 
the building of golf course; 
- 
the provision of more moorings for yachts; 
- 
a casino in Gozo; 
- 
more artificial dive-sites and a recompression chamber; 
- 
the continuation of the Mgarr and Cirkewwa harbour projects; 
- 
an incubation center for the establishment of small enterprises 
in the artisan an information technology sectors; 
 
 
47 
 
 
- 
rebuilding of roads; 
- 
employment and training schemes for the workers; 
- 
the Chambray and Ggantija projects. 
 
These projects, earmarked to start in the coming months, are being  
co-financed among other projects by the EU. 
 
Government is also working on a new strategy to strengthen industry 
and commerce in Gozo and is preparing a new packet of financial 
tools to offset the disadvantage that these sectors suffer in Gozo due to 
double insularity, periphery and the smallness of the island’s market. 
 
Finally, government declares that it has no intention of increasing the 
Gozo Channel fares because of VAT. 
 
 
Fiscal Measures 
 
The price of oil and its impact on the Public Costs 
 
We cannot escape the reality that the world is facing as a result of the 
increase in the international price of oil. 
 
Everyone knows that during the past year the international economic 
situation was characterised by heavy uncertainty because of the price 
of oil.  Malta uses oil only to generate electricity and, therefore, as a 
result Enemalta felt the impact on the exorbitant increase in the oil 
price. 
 
Since 1998, water and electricity rates have remained unchanged even 
if the price of our international competitors increased.   The increase in 
the international oil prices until the end of this year will not be passed 
on to consumers but will be absorbed by Enemalta and the Water 
Service Corporation (WSC).  This means that, while the competitors of 
the Maltese industry are paying higher rates, the competitiveness of 
 
 
48 
 
 
Maltese products has been given another boost.  This also means that 
Enemalta will absorb about Lm14 million.  This is the assurance that 
we had given last August and we have kept our word.  We did this 
and, at the same time, we have attained our financial goals. 
 
I wish to remind everyone that the last time that the water and 
electricity rates have changed in Malta they went down rather than 
upwards.  The Nationalist administration had reversed the massive 
increase which the previous government had imposed and which had 
nothing to do with the international price of oil. 
 
At that time, government had increased water and electricity rates in a 
massive way and, in some instances, these rose threefold.  This, in 
addition to the introduction of a door tax that was meant to pay for 
the upkeep of the sewage system.  In 1997, government had increased 
by nearly 90% the water and electricity bill for a three-member 
household with an average consumption.  After the 1998 elections, the 
new administration brought down this increase to 19%. 
 
When the Labour administration introduced these increases in 1997, 
the international price of oil was approximately US$12 a barrel.   This 
year, the international price of oil has exceeded US$50. 
 
Government is still of the opinion that it has to continue to remain 
committed to cut down administrative expenses and inefficiencies in 
Enemalta and WSC.  Pressure on these two corporations has 
continued to increase every year since 1998 because the water and 
electricity tariff rates did no increase. While one cannot deny the fact 
that Enemalta does not have any control on the international price of 
oil, government must ensure that all those who will be asked to pay 
more would be doing this because of increases in the international 
price of oil and not because of inefficiencies. 
 
In 2005, Enemalta is expected to spend Lm48 million in oil for the 
generation of electricity.  This means that the impact of the increases 
 
 
49 
 
 
in the international price of oil on Enemalta for 2005 is projected to be 
more than Lm16 million. 
 
We cannot reduce the impact on Enemalta alone.  WSC uses a quarter 
of all the electricity that is generated for industry for polishing 
seawater into drinking water. 
 
The reality must be addressed however harsh it may be. 
 
During discussion within MCESD, government made a number of 
commitments that I will repeat here. 
 
We are not going to recover Lm16 million oil price increases from 
consumers.  Government has decided that Enemalta would absorb 
Lm8.3 million from this increase and pass only Lm7.1 million to 
consumers.  We are putting up a consultative committee, made up of 
economists who are experts in the oil sector and Central Bank 
representatives to advice on the purchase of our oil needs at the best 
price possible.  The way that oil is purchased should not continue to 
be at the political level. 
 
In Malta, we have about 11,000 households that are considered social 
cases that at present spend an average of Lm7.50 annually for 
electricity, including meter charges.  These households will continue 
to pay their electricity bill without the fuel surcharge.  No measure 
regarding electricity will affect households with social needs. 
 
We are not going to increase the water and electricity rates.  Instead, 
we are introducing an oil surcharge that would be reflected separately 
in the bill.  Through this surcharge of 17 % on the water and electricity 
consumption 
to 
all 
consumers, 
government 
would 
collect              
Lm7.7 million in revenues.  The fuel surcharge would be only on 
consumption and would not be applied on meter rentals. 
 
 
50 
 
 
The difference in the new consumption costs for any factory and any 
hotel would not exceed Lm5000 annually.  Thus, we would be 
ensuring that the industry’s competitiveness would not be eroded. 
 
I must mention here that, only yesterday, I was informed by the Malta 
Hotels and Restaurants Association (MHRA) that there might be a 
different method of applying this surcharge that would be 
advantageous for them while, at the same time, securing the same 
revenues for Enemalta.  As I have stated, I will remain open to any 
proposal. 
 
Government is committed that the fuel surcharge would be revised 
every six months according other international price of oil. 
 
These measures will come into effect from January next year. 
 
Contrary to what had happened in 1997, my government examined 
the impact of this measure on various types of bills. 
 
I shall start by explaining the anticipated impact on domestic 
consumption: 
 
Each household will have an average increase of 5c3 a day, or 15% on 
that which it paid in 1998 for its electricity consumption.  140,000 
households - practically everybody- would have an increase of less 
than Lm25 for the whole year-apart from the 11,000 social cases who 
would not incur any increase. 
 
The less the consumer pays, the less the surcharge would be as a per 
cent of the whole bill as I shall explain further: 
 
- 
those who currently pay Lm4.31 a month will have an increase 
of 39c a  month (that is, an increase of 9%); 
- 
those who currently pay Lm7.78 a month will have an increase 
of 98c a month (that is, an increase of 12.6%); 
 
 
51 
 
 
- 
those who currently pay Lm10.09 a month will have an 
increase of Lm1.37 a month (that is, an increase of 13.6%); 
- 
those who currently pay Lm13.56 a month will have an 
increase of Lm1.96 a month (that is an increase of 14.5%); 
- 
those who currently pay Lm25.11 a month will have an 
increase of Lm3.92 a month (that is an increase of 15.6%). 
 
In industry, only 168 factories will see their costs rise by more than 
Lm1700. 
 
I should mention that Enemalta would be introducing controls that 
would change the present system of the way it deals with theft of 
electricity.  Those who are caught stealing electricity will be heavily 
fined and will not get their service back before they have paid all their 
dues.  We shall not tolerate the minimal abuse at the expense of 
Enemalta that will have to be borne by the majority of the consumers 
who pay their water and electricity bills in the most exacting way. 
 
We would also be taking measures to help more Maltese to use 
electricity economically at home and at their place of work.  There is 
no doubt that, with some little care, they could make savings and it is 
our duty to inform the public to make efforts that could save 
consumption and, therefore, costs on their bills. 
 
 
The price of gas  
 
Enemalta is carrying, and will, continue to carry the increase in the 
price of a gas cylinder. 
 
For a 12-kilo gas cylinder which is commonly used in households, the 
consumer pays Lm2.32.  But the cost for Enemalta at present is so 
much more that the selling price would instead have been Lm3.75.  
Therefore, Enemalta is losing Lm1.43 on every cylinder. 
 
 
 
52 
 
 
During the past eight years, Enemalta's gas operations have 
accumulated losses of more than Lm6 million and this year these 
operations are expected to record a loss of Lm2.5 million. 
 
In spite of all this, we will not be increasing the price of gas this year 
and the government will absorb the losses. 
 
 
Cigarettes and Tobacco 
 
Government was at the forefront in passing laws against smoking in 
public in an open and discriminatory way against those who do not 
smoke and against those whose health is negatively affected by 
smoking.   It is evident that government has found that the majority 
feels that these measures were not only needed but that they were fair. 
 
The imposition of taxes is another deterrent to cut down on smoking 
or even perhaps to stop smoking altogether. 
 
Once again this year, government considered the need to increase 
excise duty on tobacco products including cigarettes.  With immediate 
effect there will be a re-adjustment of 5c in excise duty on every 
packet of cigarettes.  Other tobacco rates would be similarly adjusted.  
While government would continue to educate smokers on the 
inherent danger of smoking it would strengthen its fight against the 
smuggling of tobacco products. 
 
 
Excise Duty on Mobile Telephony 
 
In an effort to reduce the ratio of direct taxation to total income and to 
provide more for indirect taxation when taxation is required, with an 
immediate effect we are introducing an excise duty of 3% on all 
expenditure, including that for rentals, related to the use of mobile 
telephony.  Like all other services on which excise duty is levied, the 
 
 
53 
 
 
Customs Department will collect the duty from the companies 
providing this service.  
 
 
Increase in the passenger departure tax on trips starting from Malta 
 
Travel from Malta is currently subject to a passenger departure tax of 
Lm10 and a passenger service charge of Lm6 which are both included 
in the ticket price. While the passenger departure tax on sea travel is 
not passed on to government but is retained by the Malta Maritime 
Authority (MMA), the Malta International Airport (MIA) also retains 
passenger service charge on all air passengers.  These two tariffs go 
towards paying for the service that passengers receive from these two 
state agencies. 
 
The Lm10 passenger departure tax, however, is collected by the 
airlines on passengers starting their journey in Malta and pass it on to 
the government. 
 
This passenger departure tax does not apply on: 
 
- 
day passengers; 
- 
incoming passengers who are returning home; 
- 
passengers arriving by sea and leaving by boat on the same 
day; 
 
As from 1st August, this passenger departure tax will increase to Lm20 
for every trip starting from Malta.  However, this increase will not 
apply for sea travel. 
 
The present conditions applicable to the departure tax will remain. 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
 
Payment of Duty on Documents 
 
Duty amounting to Lm5 is paid under the Duty on Documents Act on 
the renewal of insurance policy except for health and life insurance. 
 
An anomaly emerged in the payment of this fee, and on January 1st 
2002 it was reduced to 50% of the premium where this would be less 
than Lm5. 
 
It seems that this measure did not completely eliminate the anomaly.   
Therefore, as from next January, the duty would be 10% of the 
premium when the premium is less than Lm5. 
 
 
Inherited Property 
 
In last year‘s Budget Speech, it was announced that the sale of 
immovable property acquired from an inheritance, would be taxed 
like all other property except for property inherited prior to                 
25th November 1992 which, therefore, was subject to a final rate of 7% 
of the proceeds. 
 
Between 1994 and 2003, sale of property acquired through inheritance 
was not subject to capital gains tax.  Sellers who had entered on a 
promise of sale prior to 25th November 2003 were given a benefit 
whereby the final tax rate was put at 5% of the proceeds instead of the 
normal tax rate. 
 
This resulted in cases that had not entered on a promise of sale and 
were being disadvantaged.  Therefore, those who inherited property 
between November 1992 and November 2003 and who had not 
entered on a promise of sale by 25th November 2003 were now being 
given the opportunity to adjust the declared value of the property to 
compensate for any increase.  Thus, those who had inherited property 
 
 
55 
 
 
before November 2003 would be brought in line with those who had 
inherited property before the introduction of this amendment. 
 
Those wishing to adjust the declared value of their property will have 
to do this up to the end of June next year under the Duty on 
Documents Act.  This adjustment will be done on the difference 
between the original value of the property and the adjusted value 
without being subject to penalties or interest.  The adjusted value will 
be considered as the value of the property when it is sold.  Details will 
be announced in the near future. 
 
 
Transfer or Exchange of Movable Property and Shares between 
Companies in the Same Group 
 
Last year, government announced various measures affecting 
transactions between companies within the same group.  As part of 
those measures, the Income Tax Act was amended this year.  These 
amendment need to be accompanied by regulations to regulate these 
transactions. 
 
During the year the Inland Revenue Department held various 
meetings about these regulations and drew up a draft legal notice.  
The regulations will establish the manner as to how one should 
establish the value of the shares that are to be transferred.  An 
exchange of shares that does not result in a change of the ultimate 
individual beneficial shareholder will be exempt. 
 
 
Poverty and Social Exclusion 
 
When one looks at the ratio of social expenditure on other global 
expenditure one would find that over the past year social spending 
reached Lm330.4 million or 43% of recurrent costs.  For 2005, social 
spending would rise by 3% to Lm340.6 million or 46 % of the total. 
 
 
56 
 
 
This was a comprehensive and ambitious plan.  There was need to 
increasingly tackle the problem of domestic violence and child abuse. 
 
The National Action Plan Against Poverty and Social Exclusion that 
was launched by government earlier this year focused on various 
areas that needed to be addressed with great energy in order for our 
society to progress in full cohesion. 
 
We might also mention, however, that our society is not alone in 
facing these problems as these are universal.  However, there is also 
substantial work being done by many governments and by all those 
who are involved in these areas and their work is incessant. 
 
The fight against poverty, both if it is real and if there is risk for it, is 
perennial. 
 
 
Increasing Children’s Allowance 
 
Under the children’s allowance scheme, a family with one child 
receives an allowance of 6% of the difference between Lm10,270 and 
the income of the household. 
 
A family with two children is given 9% of this difference and a family 
of three children receives 12%.  Families of four children and more 
benefit from an additional 2%. 
 
Government, however, feels that while correcting the anomalies in the 
existing rates (from the 3% increase from the second to the third child 
to an increase of 2% for families with four or more children) it will 
apply this measure to support even more families with four or more 
children.  Therefore, as from next year, the allowance for families with 
four children will rise from 14% to 15% and 3% more for subsequent 
children. 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
This measure is estimated to benefit about 1000 families. 
 
 
Assistance to Parents of Children with Special Needs  
 
Government intended to retain its policy of having an inclusive 
society.  This principle would be further strengthened if it were 
instilled from early childhood.  Teaching in state schools for children 
with special needs was always free of charge.  The same applies for 
Church schools which government compensated through subsidies.  
Moreover, the first Lm200 in school fees for children with special 
needs in private schools are deducted for tax purposes from the 
parents’ income. 
 
Government will continue to help these children as much as possible.  
Therefore, government has accepted recommendations from the 
National Commission for Persons with Disability to increase the 
exemption from tax to a higher ceiling of Lm4000 for these parents 
who sent their children to private schools and need a facilitator for 
whom they pay as long as this need is certified by the Statementing 
Board and the facilitator is recognized by the Ministry of Education. 
 
There are currently 26 facilitators full time and 10 part time employed 
in six private schools paid for by parents.  We do appreciate the fact 
that this is quite a burden for these parents and, therefore, 
government felt it should help. 
 
 
VAT Refunds on Procurement by Persons with Disability 
 
As from last May a number of products became liable to VAT or had 
their VAT rate increased from 5% to 18%. 
 
As promised, a scheme has been worked out whereby government 
would refund VAT paid on such products as long as they were for the 
 
 
58 
 
 
exclusive use of person with disability.  The Commission will consider 
claims for refunds for persons with disability.  Applicants have to be 
eligible for assistance and need to produce the original receipt 
together with the claim. 
 
 
Assisting Couples with Disability who wish to marry  
 
At present, two persons with disability who wish to marry each other 
and who are in receipt of a disability pension will forfeit one of the 
pensions. 
 
Government considers this as discriminatory and, therefore, finds no 
problem in continuing to pay both pensions in these instances thus 
securing the financial base of the couple rather reducing it. 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The renewal of our country would not only need to be carried out by 
everyone but also would need to include everyone.  These efforts 
would only make sense if the value of solidarity remained valid and 
guided by our priorities in the economy, education and the 
environment.  The health service, personalised social benefits and 
pensions continue to be the framework within which the country 
should be renewed. 
 
Government was providing leadership to the country: leadership that 
promoted 
major 
opportunities 
but 
which 
also 
demanded 
responsibility from one and all to create a stronger society. 
 
Without renewal, the country would be unable sustain this framework 
of solidarity that we have started together. 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
1 
Appendix ‘A’ 
 
 
THE EUROPEAN UNION IN A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 
 
The EU economy enjoyed sustainable growth in recent years.  This 
growth, however, has now slowed done.  During 1998-2002, the 
average annual percentage growth of real GDP showed that EU 
growth was around 2.4% while the same growth was faster in the 
USA (3.0%) and even more faster in China (7.6%). 
 
Since 2001, the EU’s GDP was lower than that forecast.  This means 
that member states in the euro zone experienced negative growth that 
was making pressures on cost and inflation as well as on employment 
levels.  Some put the blame for this on the Central European Bank that 
kept the nominal interest rate on the high side.  Some others blamed 
the Stability and Growth Pact that placed unnecessary restrictions on 
the borrowing needs and debts of governments.  It may also be that 
the EU economy is still feeling the impact of the effect of the 
Germany’s reunification that required substantial subsidies to fund 
increasing unemployment in the east.  Above all, however, what 
brings about economic growth is that which promotes increase in the 
productive potential of the country. 
 
With an economic growth lower than that forecast, the EU 
Commission acknowledged the fact that enlargement could well 
provide the necessary timely trust for economic growth and 
development within the whole of Europe itself. 
 
Economic growth and development as a result of enlargement can 
come about if the new member states can develop and take the 
comparative advantage that they have, mainly in their different wage 
structures.  This comparative advantage should attract western 
European industry that intends to relocate to seek competitiveness 
with that in the Far East.  In this scenario, the comparative advantage 
 
2 
lies in those production sectors that are labour intensive but with 
value-added, while, in countries such as Malta, where huge 
investment in human capital has taken place over time, the 
comparative advantage lies in the manufacturing sectors with higher 
value-added and in the services industries where specialisation, skills 
and a trained labour force are needed. 
 
Before enlargement, the EU experienced investment both from inside 
and from outside the Union.  This was to be expected as investment 
seeks efficiency and a market.  In regard to efficiency, both the 
German and the Dutch industry invested in the new central and 
eastern European member states in order to produce goods and 
services with better efficiency and lesser costs than those at home 
while access to a European market has brought with it large 
investment opportunities in the new member states and in the whole 
of the Union.   
 
Moreover, EU funding is expected to help substantially the 
development and growth of the new member states.  These countries 
are expected to receive substantial funds under a number of EU 
programmes.  These involve investment in defined programmes that 
promote economic development, high employment opportunities and 
regional and social cohesion.  From now on, EU membership should 
impact on employment, productivity and investment.  Once this takes 
place, there should be economic growth in member states that would 
lead to long-term sustainability in the Union. 
 
Europe, therefore, is committed to work for more growth and job 
creation as may be evidenced from a recent Presidency report called 
‘Facing the Challenges’.  The Lisbon Strategy has not yet reached its 
goals of a 3% annual growth and, therefore, there is need for more 
effective economic activity in order to attain sustainable development 
and to face change with courage.  This is what the report calls for from 
member states. 
 
3 
Growth will be based on solidarity, competitiveness, and cohesion.  
While consolidating what is has so far achieved with its traditional 
politics that have been more focused on the agricultural sector, on 
cohesion and on the creation of single market and macroeconomic 
stability, the EU will now be addressing those new needs that are 
brought together under three main priorities, that is, sustainable 
development based on an economic, social and environmental policy, 
European citizenship that brings the citizen closer to the Union by 
promoting more freedom, justice, security and access to basic 
consumer needs, and an effective role that promotes sustainable 
development and contributing to strategic security. 
 
 
STRENGTHENING 
THE 
LOCAL 
ECONOMY 
IN 
THE 
EUROPEAN 
BACKGROUND 
 
The Convergence Plan for Malta which government published earlier 
this year, and which was sent to the EU Commission as a macro-
economic policy statement for the medium term, provides for a 
number of objectives that were drawn up to generate economic 
regeneration towards more stability and sustainability, with the 
creation of more jobs and wealth, and as a consequence, real 
convergence with the EU. 
 
These macro-economic objectives are: 
 
- 
the realisation of sustainable high level economic growth and 
employment in order to achieve a high standard of living; 
 
- 
a sustainable short term fiscal consolidation which, on the 
other hand, would ensure that public debt growth will not 
exceed economic growth; and 
 
- 
the strengthening of our enterprise and the sustainability of 
our foreign trade. 
 
1 
 Appendix ‘B’ 
 
 
FINANCIAL YEAR 2004 
 
One of government’s main aims for attaining economic stability is the 
restoration of public finances to a more sustainable path.  This year 
also showed that it was not at all easy.  However, government has 
both the will and the strong determination to put in place what it 
planned and committed itself to do under the Convergence Plan that 
it had submitted to the EU Commission in order to bring down its 
fiscal ratio to less than 3% of GDP. 
 
The Consolidated Fund ended last year with an imbalance of Lm105 
million.  For this year we projected to bring down this imbalance to 
Lm95 million. 
 
We have not only attained these targets but we have also improved on 
them so that by the end of December the structural deficit will go 
down by Lm1 million to Lm94 million, which is also Lm11 million 
than that for last year. 
 
Revenues from direct taxes are expected to be around Lm404 million, 
that is, about Lm4 million less than originally projected mainly from 
income tax.  Indirect taxes are estimated to yield Lm308 million that is, 
about Lm10 million less than projected.  Just half of this shortfall is 
expected from lesser customs and excise duties mainly because there 
was a shift in trade to EU imports after 1st May.  Fewer receipts are 
also being expected for gaming taxes.  As I shall explain later on, 
government transfers 75% of all import duties from third countries to 
the EU, which as from last May is expected to amount to Lm4 million, 
and retains the remaining 25% as administrative expenses. 
 
2 
Other income of Lm112 million is expected from other sources.  This is 
Lm4 million short of that projected in the beginning of the year.  
While Enemalta Corporation will not manage any profits this year 
due to the heavy burden it carries as a result of the oil price increases 
on the international market, there will be an additional Lm1 million in 
profits are expected from the Central Bank of Malta, Lm3 million 
more from rents mainly from Malta Air Traffic Services Ltd, and other 
miscellaneous receipts, including arrears of payments by Maltacom 
for cost-sharing of pensions paid but the Treasury to public 
employees who had retired from service under it. 
 
On the other hand, we have managed to control recurrent costs at the 
projected level of Lm739 million.  Payments of personal emoluments 
are expected to go up by Lm2 million due to annual adjustments, 
bonuses, and payment of allowances as well as because of new 
recruits who were taken on where required, among others, in the 
health sector, in education, the armed forces, and the care of the 
elderly. 
 
Operational and maintenance expenses will increase by almost Lm7 
million to Lm53 million.  Half of this increase will be on medicines 
and related costs, on a subsidy of Lm700,000 to Gozo Channel Co 
under a Public Service Obligation Contract that government had 
signed earlier this year, and in payment of Lm700,000 for a 
shareholding in the European Investment Bank in which we became 
members upon accession. 
 
There will be Lm2 million less on the other hand, expenditure on 
programmes and initiatives and for contributions to public entities 
will be Lm9 million less. 
 
Interest payments than originally estimated and costs will, therefore, 
go up to about Lm70 million.  This was due to fewer Treasury Bills 
issues. 
 
 
3 
Capital expenditure is expected to be around Lm110 million, that is, 
about Lm17 million less than the original projections notwithstanding 
the purchase of new property in Brussels to house the Permanent 
Representation to the EU and of our Embassy for Belgium.  One of the 
reasons for this was because there was not the material time between 
the approval for works and projects that are earmarked for co-
financing under EU funds and the ratification under the Italo-Maltese 
Financial Protocol which came late, and the start of their 
implementation to generate enough spending.  I hasten to add, 
however, that this will in no way prejudice reimbursement under both 
sources.  In the case of EU funds, the Commission has already 
transferred in an account that it holds with the Central Bank of Malta 
10% of the structural funds that are due to Malta while another 6% are 
expected later next year.  In the case of the Italian Protocol, its lifetime 
has now been extended up to 2007. 
 
As a result, the imbalance in the Consolidated Fund is expected to be 
Lm94 million, that is, lower than originally projected  
 
For central government, which includes also public entities that fall 
under certain established criteria and therefore fall within general 
government, there is need to provide for a number of adjustments for 
certain transactions, as I shall state: 
 
- 
a net balance of Lm4 million as loan to Gozo Ferries Co Ltd for 
the latter to pay on another loan that it undertook for the 
building of the Gozo ferries; 
 
- 
a global imbalance of public entities that fall under general 
government which this year are expected to reach Lm9 million; 
 
- 
an adjustment of Lm 1 million making up Treasury Clearance 
Fund transfers for non-financial transactions to deposit 
accounts and advance accounts. 
 
 
4 
The central government deficit this year, therefore, is expected to be 
around Lm97.9 million.  Moreover, another imbalance of Lm500,000 
needs to be added on resulting from the consolidated accounts of local 
councils so that the general government deficit will be Lm98.5 million 
or 5.18% of GDP. 
 
This means that we have experienced a reduction in the general 
government deficit over last year to Lm79 million and of 4.41% in the 
deficit ratio. 
 
Further details for the fiscal position for this year are provided in 
Table 3 attached. 
 
 
Financial Year 2005 
 
The imbalance in the Consolidated Fund in 2005 year is expected be 
around Lm76 million as that projected under the Convergence Plan 
which government published earlier on this year. 
 
Recurrent costs are expected to be about Lm900 million, that is, 
around Lm76 million more that we had projected for 2004.  From this 
amount, no less than Lm44 million will come from EU budgetary 
contributions and grants while another Lm22 million will be 
reimbursements of costs under structural and cohesion funds, 
transition funds, pre-accession funds, and agricultural funds that 
would have already been made by the government on projects, 
programmes and other initiatives eligible for EU funding. 
 
Another Lm8 million are expected as reimbursement of costs that 
government would have made on projects agreed under the Italian 
Financial Protocol. 
Table No. 3
Lm'000
Consolidated Fund Position
Total Revenue
739,221
843,000
824,193
Tax Revenue
668,291
726,542
711,970
Non-Tax Revenue
70,930
116,458
112,223
Recurrent Expenditure
740,696
811,149
808,544
Recurrent Expenses
677,654
739,237
738,818
Interest Payments
63,042
71,912
69,726
Recurrent Deficit/Surplus
(1,475)
31,851
15,649
Capital Expenditure
103,970
126,656
109,575
Total Expenditure
844,666
937,805
918,119
Structural Deficit
(105,445)
(94,805)
(93,926)
Central Government Position
Adjustments for Financial Transactions
(71,090)
(4,051)
Central Government Deficit
(176,535)
(97,977)
Local Government Deficit/Surplus
(525)
(525)
General Government Deficit
(177,061)
(98,502)
Gross Domestic Product
1,846.10
1,902.40
General Government Deficit as a % of GDP
9.59%
5.18%
FINANCIAL POSITION - 2004
2003
2004
ACTUAL
APPROVED
REVISED
 
6 
Income from other sources is expected to go up to Lm756 million or 
Lm44 million more than this year.  From this increase, Lm17 million 
are expected from direct taxation of which Lm12 million from income 
tax as a result of enforcement, more efficiency, and economic growth.  
Receipts from indirect taxation are expected to be Lm27 million more 
than in 2004.  VAT receipts are expected to be Lm27 million more next 
year mainly due to a time lag that was experienced this year as, from 
last May, importers stopped paying VAT at import stage.  Moreover, 
there will not be a repeat of a one-off payment of Lm8 million by 
Maltco Ltd as licence under the privatisation agreement.  Meanwhile, 
a re-classification of certain items of expenditure was made as licences 
for wireless; fixed telephony and mobile telephony are now being 
collected by the Malta Communications Authority.  Another Lm2 
million for television licences would be added to government revenue 
while these had been hitherto collected and retained by the Public 
Broadcasting Services. 
 
Central Bank profits are next year expected top be some Lm6 million 
less than what they were in 2004, while there will be another shortfall 
of Lm4.5 million for rents, mainly due to Malta Industrial Parks Ltd 
collecting factory rents and retaining them for financing maintenance 
of industrial zones.  There will also be Lm9 million less from 
miscellaneous receipts.  On the other hand, office fees will next year 
increase by Lm15 million mainly because of the further expansion of 
the eco-contribution base, for payment for the collection of 
construction waste, the collection of television licences which till now 
have been retained by the Public Broadcasting Service and from right 
of use. 
 
Recurrent costs, net of interest payments, will next year go up to 
Lm761 million, that is, Lm23 million or 3% more than this year. 
 
The stiffest increase next year is expected to be on programmes and 
initiatives where total costs will amount to Lm445 million or Lm41 
million more than this year. 
 
7 
From this increase, Lm23 million are due to a re-classification of 
certain costs which this year are being recorded under different 
categories.  These include Lm20 million for medicines and ancillary 
costs, which have currently been classified under operations and 
maintenance, and about Lm3 million subvention to MIMCOL towards 
its debt servicing costs.  This year, these have been classified under 
contributions to public entities.  Other substantial increases include an 
additional Lm5 million on social security benefits, and Lm22 million, 
or Lm6 million more than this year, as own resources contribution to 
the EU budget.  Next year will be the first full year for these 
payments.  Of course, Malta will, on the other hand, be benefiting 
from grants amounting to Lm44 million. 
 
Another increase of Lm6 million or 3% will go for personal 
emoluments.  This is mainly due to annual adjustments that are being 
estimated at Lm2 million, the cost of living increase that is being 
estimated at another Lm2 million, and a Lm1 million provision for 
wages for new recruits who are expected in the heath sector. 
 
These increases, however, will be offset by a lower expenditure of 
Lm22 million on operations sand maintenance where costs are 
expected to reach Lm31 million.  As I already explained, this is mainly 
due to a reclassification of expenditure items. 
 
Interest payments, next year, are estimated to be around Lm78 million 
or Lm8 million more than this year. 
 
Capital expenditure in 2005 is projected at Lm137 million or Lm28 
million more than in 2004. 
 
More EU funded expenditure is expected next year as the 
implementation of a number of projects and work will step up.  
Expenditure on projects financed under the Italian Protocol will also 
step up next year. 
 
8 
Thus, total government expenditure next year is being estimated at 
Lm976 million or Lm58 million more than in 2004.  This also means 
that, while total revenues would amount to Lm900 million, the 
imbalance in the Consolidated Fund is expected to Lm76 million or 
Lm18 million less than this year. 
 
This is evidence of government’s determination to consolidate public 
finances by restoring them to a more sustainable path. 
 
 
The Medium Term Fiscal Framework 
 
As has been already said in this Speech, government is showing its 
determination by deed to address the country’s economic and fiscal 
situation.  Apart from the full programme of works that I have just 
mentioned, other activities are in place so that public finances can be 
seriously put back on a sustainable path. 
 
Under the Convergence Plan, government has committed itself to 
bring down the general government deficit ratio to 3% of GDP: and 
this it will do.  Table 4, which I ask the House to take as read, provides 
the general government framework up to 2007. 
 
Next year, the general government deficit ratio will go down to 3.73%.  
This will go down further to 2.33% in 2006 and to 1.41% in 2007. 
 
There will be a recurrent surplus of Lm61 million next year and in 
2006, and of around Lm51 million in 2007.while the imbalance in the 
Consolidated Fund will go down from Lm94 million this year to Lm34 
million in 2007.  While the deficit goes down, government’s 
borrowing requirements will be reduced so that public debt servicing 
costs will remain constant at current levels as a percentage to GDP. 
Table No. 4
Lm'000
Consolidated Fund Position
Total Revenue
739,221
824,193
900,084
908,881
910,948
Tax Revenue
668,291
711,970
756,257
780,656
807,506
Non-Tax Revenue
70,930
112,223
143,827
128,225
103,442
Recurrent Expenditure
740,696
808,544
839,108
847,567
859,473
Recurrent Expenses
677,654
738,818
761,404
767,663
778,569
Interest Payments
63,042
69,726
77,704
79,904
80,904
Recurrent Deficit/Surplus
(1,475)
15,649
60,976
61,314
51,475
Capital Expenditure
103,970
109,575
137,076
112,114
85,475
Total Expenditure
844,666
918,119
976,184
959,681
944,948
Structural Deficit
(105,445)
(93,926)
(76,100)
(50,800)
(34,000)
Central Government Position
Adjustments for Financial Transactions
(71,090)
(4,051)
1,797
2,356
3,517
Central Government Deficit
(176,535)
(97,977)
(74,303)
(48,444)
(30,483)
Local Government Deficit/Surplus
(525)
(525)
-
-
-
General Government Deficit
(177,061)
(98,502)
(74,303)
(48,444)
(30,483)
Gross Domestic Product
1,846.11
1,902.40
1,992.05
2,079.16
2,161.92
General Government Deficit as a % of GDP
9.59%
5.18%
3.73%
2.33%
1.41%
2003
2004
ACTUAL
REVISED
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS 
2007
ESTIMATED
2005
ESTIMATED
2006
ESTIMATED
 
10 
 
This means that the growth of about 9% in government’s recurrent 
costs this year will be drastically reduced to 3.7 % next year and to 
1.4% by 2007.  All this will put off the criticism that recurrent cost 
growth is exceeding economic growth. 
 
 
EU Funds 
 
EU funds make up one of the main tools for the workings of the EU 
regional policy and for the attainment of objectives under cohesion 
policy. 
 
The EU structural policy is funded under structural funds or better 
still, under the European Regional Funds, the European Social Fund, 
the Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, and under the 
Fisheries Guidance Fund.  Each of these funds, or financial 
instruments, was set up to address priority areas notwithstanding that 
these oftentimes overlap. 
 
Upon accession, Malta became eligible for participation under these 
funds. 
 
I would like here to look into Malta’s access to these funds and to its 
contribution to the EU budget for 2004-2006. 
 
I shall start with the net favourable balances for Malta by 31st 
December, 2006 which I am drawing in Table 5 attached here.  The 
global assistance under the structural and cohesion funds, as well as  
under all the other funds, such as those of transition and pre-
accession, amount to Lm64 million.  In addition, Malta will be 
receiving other payments of about Lm81 million in budgetary 
compensation, and a grant of Lm32 million.  Against these, Malta will 
be paying over the same period to the EU Budget the total amount of  
RECEIPTS
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
Agriculture
8000000.00
3453600.00
10000000.00
4317000.00
11000000.00
4748700.00
29000000.00
12519300.00
Structural Funds
14381466.78
6208479.21
17084750.01
7375486.58
22599447.80
9756181.62
54065664.59
23340147.40
Cohesion Funds
6642199.55
2867437.55
7890733.30
3406429.57
10437742.15
4505973.29
24970675.00
10779840.40
Transition Funds
11800000.00
5094060.00
6300000.00
2719710.00
3100000.00
1338270.00
21200000.00
9152040.00
Pre-Accession Aid
4147804.00
1790606.99
3500000.00
1510950.00
8060000.00
3480000.00
15710000.00
6780000.00
Total Receipts
44971470.33
19414183.74
44775483.31
19329576.14
55197189.95
23829124.90
144946339.59
62571327.80
PAYMENTS
TOR
6695258.28
2890343.00
10042888.58
4335515.00
10042888.58
4335515.00
26781035.44
11561373.00
VAT
4384662.03
1892858.60
6576993.19
2839287.96
6576993.19
2839287.96
17538648.41
7571434.52
GNI 
20208779.01
8724129.90
30313168.59
13086194.88
30313168.59
13086194.88
80835116.19
34896519.66
UK Rebate
2819539.01
1217194.99
4229308.41
1825792.44
4229308.41
1825792.44
11278155.83
4868779.87
Reserves
65613.00
28325.13
98419.46
42487.68
98419.46
42487.68
262451.91
113300.49
Total Payments
34173851.33
14752851.62
51260778.23
22129277.96
51260778.23
22129277.96
136695407.78
59011407.54
Budgetary Compensation
41854519.04
18068595.87
62781778.56
27102893.80
62781778.56
27102893.80
167418076.16
72274383.48
Lump Sum
13508600.96
5831663.03
20262901.44
8747494.55
20262901.44
8747494.55
54034403.84
23326652.14
Total
55363120.00
23900258.90
83044680.00
35850388.36
83044680.00
35850388.36
221452480.00
95601035.62
Net Balance
66160739.00
28561591.03
76559385.08
33050686.54
86981091.72
37550235.30
229703411.81
99160955.88
0.4317
MALTA/EU NET BALANCES
(COMMITMENT APPROPIATIONS)
2004
2005
2006
2004-2006
Table No. 5
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
EURO
LM
RECEIPTS
Agriculture
8.10
3.50
9.00
3.89
9.80
4.23
26.90
11.61
Structural Funds*
14.80
6.39
21.10
9.11
27.30
11.79
63.20
27.28
Cohesion Funds**
6.96
3.00
5.84
2.52
7.80
3.37
20.60
8.89
Transition Funds
11.80
5.09
6.30
2.72
3.10
1.34
21.20
9.15
Pre-Accession Aid***
4.15
1.79
3.50
1.51
8.06
3.48
15.71
6.78
Total Receipts
45.81
19.78
45.74
19.75
56.06
24.20
147.61
63.72
PAYMENTS*
TOR
6.70
2.89
10.04
4.34
10.04
4.34
26.78
11.56
VAT
4.38
1.89
6.58
2.84
6.58
2.84
17.54
7.57
GNI 
20.21
8.72
30.31
13.09
30.31
13.09
80.84
34.90
UK Rebate
2.82
1.22
4.23
1.83
4.23
1.83
11.28
4.87
Reserves
0.07
0.03
0.10
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.26
0.11
Total Payments
34.17
14.75
51.26
22.13
51.26
22.13
136.70
59.01
Budgetary Compensation*
41.85
18.07
73.00
31.51
71.71
30.96
186.56
80.54
Lump Sum*
13.51
5.83
30.21
13.04
30.95
13.36
74.67
32.24
Total
55.36
23.90
103.21
44.56
102.66
44.32
261.23
112.77
Net Balance
67.00
28.92
97.69
42.17
107.46
46.39
272.14
117.48
* current prices
** 2004 prices subject to an annual euro deflator
*** including disbursements/reimbursements of funds committed prior to 2004
Rate of Exchange = 0.4317
MALTA/EU NET BALANCES
(COMMITMENT APPROPRIATIONS)
(millions)
2004
2005
2006
2004-2006
 
12 
about Lm59 million.  Thus Malta will have about Lm117 million net 
receipts by 2006. 
 
 
Structural Funds 
 
The programme of large number of projects, programmes, and other 
initiatives is being estimated at about Lm42 million over three years 
up to end 2006.  From theses, about Lm37 million worth of projects 
have already been identified and agreed with the EU Commission.  
These projects are expected to funded as to Lm24 million under 
structural funds, as to Lm9 million by the Maltese government and 
the rest, or Lm4 million, by the private sector. 
 
This programme of works is spread over 5 priority areas which are: 
 
- 
strategic 
investment 
and strengthening competitiveness 
(around Lm24 million); 
- 
development of human resources (Lm5 million); 
- 
rural development and fisheries (Lm8 million); 
- 
Gozo special needs (Lm4 million); 
- 
Technical assistance (Lm1 million). 
 
Meanwhile, work will continue to allocate the remaining structural 
funds, amounting to Lm4 million.  From these, Lm3 million will be 
sourced from EU funding, about Lm350, 000 from government, and 
the rest from the private sector. 
 
Details are provided under Table 6 which is being attached. 
 
Table No. 6
PRIORITY
HEADING
PROJECT
SOURCE
TOTAL 
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PRIVATE
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
MEASURE
FUNDS
SECTOR
FUNDS
SECTOR
Priority 1
Strategic Investments and strengthening Competitiveness
1.1   Improving the Environment Situation
Installation of Low NOx burners at the Marsa Power Station to comply with EU emission limits
ERDF
738,000
538,740
199,260
Acquisition of Air Moni+C31toring to comply with Acquis requirements
ERDF
500,000
375,000
125,000
Aerial emissions Control for Maghtab, Qortin and Wied Fulija Landfills
ERDF
8,400,000
6,132,000
2,268,000
Establishing Civic Amenity and bring in sites, a separable household waste collection
   and an integrated communications strategy
ERDF
4,600,000
3,358,000
1,242,000
Drinking Water Quality Project (DWQP)
ERDF
5,293,920
3,864,562
1,429,358
Malta South Sewage Transmission Infrastructure
ERDF
7,710,000
5,628,300
2,081,700
Implementing Natura 2000 of Filfla and its surrounding area
ERDF
200,000
150,000
50,000
Wied il-Mielaħ Valley Restoration and Management of Storm Water
ERDF
199,760
145,830
53,930
TOTAL MEASURE 1.1 
TOTAL
28,550,000
27,641,680
20,192,432
7,449,248
908,320
663,074
245,246
1.2   Infrastructure
1.2.1 - Transport Infrastructure
Regional Road Bridge
ERDF
5,084,746
3,813,560
1,271,186
Reconstruction and Upgrading of Hal Far Road Phase III
ERDF
3,983,000
2,987,250
995,750
Implementation of a Vessel Traffic Monitoring System
ERDF
1,100,000
825,000
275,000
Imlementation of a Security Digital Infrastructure Monitoring System
ERDF
700,000
525,000
175,000
1.2.2 - Education and Social Infrastructure
Construction of Extension to ETC's Skills Development Centre
ERDF
255,000
191,250
63,750
MCAST Child Care Centre and Community Services Provision
ERDF
152,174
114,131
38,043
Construction of Additional Floors, Refurbishing and Equipping of Existing Building
ERDF
1,523,478
1,142,609
380,869
MCAST Library and Resource Centre at Main College Campus
ERDF
217,391
163,043
54,348
Provision of Equipment for Modern and Relevant Vehicle Training Programmes
ERDF
173,913
130,435
43,478
1.2.3 - Service Infrastructure for Industry
Upgrading and Improvement of Industrial Estates
ERDF
3,500,000
2,625,000
875,000
TOTAL MEASURE 1.2 
TOTAL
18,500,000
16,689,702
12,517,278
4,172,424
1,810,298
1,357,723
452,575
1.3   Support to enterprises
Enhancing Competitiveness of SMEs and Micro-Enterprises
ERDF
2,857,142
1,000,500
713,785
1,142,857
Grant Scheme for Tourism Enterprises
ERDF
2,500,000
874,500
625,500
1,000,000
TOTAL MEASURE 1.3
TOTAL
5,357,142
5,357,142
1,875,000
1,339,285
2,142,857
0
0
0
1.4   Support to the Tourism Sector
Hagar Qim and Mnajdra Temples Construction and Interpretation Project
ERDF
3,500,000
2,205,000
1,295,000
Tourism Product Improvement Project
ERDF
1,000,000
750,000
250,000
TOTAL MEASURE 1.4  
TOTAL
4,500,000
4,500,000
2,955,000
1,545,000
0
0
0
EU STRUCTURAL FUNDS 2004 - 2006
ALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
UNALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
3
PRIORITY
HEADING
PROJECT
SOURCE
TOTAL 
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PRIVATE
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
MEASURE
FUNDS
SECTOR
FUNDS
SECTOR
EU STRUCTURAL FUNDS 2004 - 2006
ALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
UNALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
Priority 2
Developing people
2.1 Employability and Adaptability
Preservation of Traditional Maltese Crafts
ESF
242,020
181,515
60,505
Retraining and Reskilling of Workers for Engineering Industry
ESF
291,940
218,955
72,985
Retraining and Reskilling of Workers for Electronics Industry
ESF
194,380
145,785
48,595
Retraining and Reskilling of Workers for the Building and Construction Industry
ESF
193,480
145,110
48,370
Foundation Training for Adults with no formal qualifications
ESF
192,915
144,686
48,229
Training and Employment Exposure Scheme
ESF
4,884,127
3,663,095
1,221,032
Training in Traditional Boat Building
ESF
150,000
112,500
37,500
Enforcing the Knowledge Based Society
ESF
2,000
1,500
500
TOTAL MEASURE 2.1
TOTAL
6,360,000
6,150,862
4,613,146
1,537,716
212,138
159,103
53,035
2.2   Gender Equality
To Improve the Representation of Women at Managerial Levels at the Main Public Hospital in Malta
ESF
85,135
63,851
21,284
Studies related to measures aimed at improving Gender Equality
ESF
214,980
161,235
53,745
Increasing Female Participation through Childcare Services at the Work Place
ESF
1,000,000
750,000
250,000
Technology Skills for Women Returning to the workforce
ESF
294,380
220,785
73,595
TOTAL MEASURE 2.2
TOTAL
1,640,000
1,594,495
1,195,871
398,624
45,505
34,128
11,377
2.3   Life Long Learning and 
Research and Mobility Action Plan for developing in-house research capacity
ESF
259,860
194,895
64,965
Social Inclusion
Information and Communications Technology Training Programme
ESF
122,989
92,242
30,747
Pedagogical Training for Non-Formal Educators
ESF
227,137
170,352
56,785
Initiating and Managing Community Based Life-Long Learning Centre
ESF
239,779
179,834
59,945
Tourism and Support Services Training Programme
ESF
328,000
246,000
82,000
Improve retention of Specialist Staff by developing structured specialisation and 
   post-qualification training programmes locally, in collaboration with professional 
   associations and Non-Government Organisations 
ESF
212,631
159,473
53,158
Enhancing the Competitiveness of SMEs and Micro Enterprises through Life Long Learning
ESF
300,000
225,000
75,000
Literacy Programme for those seeking employment
ESF
197,941
148,455
49,486
Supported Employment Scheme for Disabled Persons
ESF
793,653
595,233
198,420
Training and Support for Labour Market Integration of Socially Excluded Persons
ESF
180,400
135,300
45,100
Households Waste Separa+C95tion at Source - Training Job Seekers to Assist in the 
   Implementation of Waste Separation at Source
ESF
200,000
150,000
50,000
EdUkate: Education/Training/Information Centre for Disadvantaged Women
ESF
278,878
209,159
69,719
Training of Inclusion Co-ordinators
ESF
118,179
88,634
29,545
TOTAL MEASURE 2.3
TOTAL
3,650,000
3,459,447
2,594,577
864,870
190,553
142,914
47,639
3
PRIORITY
HEADING
PROJECT
SOURCE
TOTAL 
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PRIVATE
TOTAL
EU
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
MEASURE
FUNDS
SECTOR
FUNDS
SECTOR
EU STRUCTURAL FUNDS 2004 - 2006
ALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
UNALLOCATED FUNDS (EUR)
Priority 3
Rural Development and Fisheries
3.1
Investment in Agricultural Holdings
EAGGF
7,392,858
2,587,500
1,108,929
3,696,429
0
0
0
3.2
Improving the Processing and Marketing of Agricultural Products
EAGGF
4,607,143
1,612,500
691,071
2,303,572
0
0
0
3.3
Fleet Renewal - Aid Scheme for Fishing Enterprises
FIFG
712,500
249,375
35,625
427,500
4,590,833
2,588,125
1,339,285
2,142,857
TOTAL PRIORITY 3
TOTAL
17,303,444
12,712,501
4,449,375
1,835,625
6,427,501
4,590,833
2,588,125
1,339,285
2,142,857
Priority 4
Regional Distinctiveness (Gozo Special Needs)
4.1   Basic Infrastructure and Development
Extension of Centre for Art and Crafts and Setting Up of Crafts Development Centre
ERDF
662,783
497,087
165,696
of the Tourism Sector
Gozo Museum of Archaeology Display Project
ERDF
100,000
75,000
25,000
The Upgrading of the TINA Road Network in Gozo
ERDF
4,051,793
3,038,845
1,012,948
Creation of Artificial Dive Sites
ERDF
211,011
158,258
52,753
TOTAL MEASURE 4.1
TOTAL
8,140,000
5,025,587
3,769,190
1,256,397
3,114,413
2,335,810
778,603
4.2  Human Resources
ETC Courses and Schemes
ESF
260,071
195,053
65,018
Crafts Courses for Sustainable Careers in Gozo
ESF
137,205
102,904
34,301
University Gozo Centre - Courses
ESF
93,523
70,142
23,381
Gozo Educational and Training Foundation (GET)
ESF
17,410
13,057
4,353
TOTAL MEASURE 4.2
TOTAL
510,000
508,209
381,156
127,053
1,791
1,343
448
Priority 5
Technical Assistance
5.1   Technical Assistance
General Technical Assistance and Administration Co-Operation
ERDF
1,413,519
1,060,140
353,379
TOTAL MEASURE 5.1
TOTAL
1,413,519
1,413,519
1,060,140
353,379
0
0
0
5.2   Technical Assistance
ESF Technical Assistance
ESF
450,000
337,500
112,500
TOTAL MEASURE 5.2
TOTAL
450,000
450,000
337,500
112,500
0
0
0
GRAND TOTAL
96,374,105
85,503,144
55,940,665
20,992,121
8,570,358 10,210,428
7,282,220
785,351
2,142,857
55,940,665
7,282,220 = 63.2m
TOTAL EU FUNDS
3
 
16 
Cohesion Funds 
 
Two important projects have been identified here and agreed with the 
EU Commission for financing under Cohesion Funds.  These are: the 
procurement and commissioning of a waste water treatment plant and 
a waste processing plant, with a total value of Lm7 million, and the 
restoration and improvement of roads with a total value of Lm4 
million.   From the total amount of Lm11 million for these two 
projects, no less than Lm9 million will be financed under Cohesion 
Funds while the rest , that is, Lm2 million from own resources. 
 
More details are found in Table 7 in this Appendix. 
 
 
Transition Funds 
 
Another source of EU finding for Malta will be the Transition Fund.  
Up to 2006, funds allocated to Malta will here be of around                
Lm9 million.  The programme for this year is already set and will cost 
Lm6 million of which no less than Lm5 million will be financed under 
the transition funds, the rest by the Maltese government. 
 
The areas for these projects are: 
 
- 
the internal market; 
- 
transport policy and administrative management; 
- 
justice and home affairs; 
- 
social policy and employment; 
- 
agriculture; 
- 
the environment; 
- 
strengthening administrative capacity. 
 
Details are provided under Table 8 which is being attached. 
 
Table No. 7
HEADING
SELECTED PROJECTS
SOURCE
TOTAL
EU
LOCAL
Environment Section
Upgrading of the Waste Treatment Plant and Material Recovery Facility
CF
16,747,500
13,398,000
3,349,500
Transport Section
Restoration and Upgrading of Sections of the TEN-T
CF
8,474,000
7,203,750
1,270,250
TOTAL SELECTED PROJECTS
TOTAL
25,221,500
20,601,750
4,619,750
FUNDS (EUR)
EU COHESION FUNDS 2004 - 2006
Table No. 8
HEADING
SELECTED PROJECTS
SOURCE
TOTAL
EU
LOCAL
Trade - Internal Market
Institution building of the Malta Standards Authority
TF
368,000
368,000
0
Additional support for the Market Surveillance System
TF
749,000
639,000
110,000
Upgrading the National Blood Transfusion Service
TF
595,000
353,000
242,000
Capacity Building of the Department of Public Health
TF
1,300,000
1,075,000
225,000
Intellectual Property Awareness
TF
180,700
148,000
32,700
TOTAL
3,192,700
2,583,000
609,700
Transport Policy and Administrative Management
Capacity Building at the Malta Maritime Authority
TF
1,053,400
985,000
68,400
TOTAL
1,053,400
985,000
68,400
Justice and Home Affairs
Strengthening Malta's capacity in the issuance of visas
TF
375,000
304,000
71,000
Development of Border Management Control
TF
156,000
143,500
12,500
Enhancement of the Asylum System
TF
94,500
94,500
0
Capacity Building in the Justice Sector
TF
276,000
241,000
35,000
Radio Network Infrastructure for 112 Call-Related Emergency Service Providers
TF
200,000
200,000
0
TOTAL
1,101,500
983,000
118,500
Social Policies and Employment
Institutional Building of the Occupational Health and Safety Authority
TF
391,000
332,000
59,000
Capacity strengthening of the Department of Social Security
TF
230,200
218,000
12,200
TOTAL
621,200
550,000
71,200
Agriculture 
Capacity Building in the Food and Veterinary Regulation Division
TF
1,002,000
1,002,000
0
TOTAL
1,002,000
1,002,000
0
Environment 
Capacity Building to introduce the Polluter Pays Principle
TF
200,000
200,000
0
Capacity  to implement the Air Quality Framework Directive
TF
256,500
208,000
48,500
Implimentation of the Nature Protection Acquis
TF
400,000
400,000
0
Implimentation systems for the Producer Responsibility Directives
TF
400,000
400,000
0
TOTAL
1,256,500
1,208,000
48,500
Administrative Capacity
Technical Assistance
TF
2,630,000
2,630,000
0
Strengthening of the VAT Department and the Tax Compliance Unit
TF
400,000
400,000
0
Measures to assist the Customs Department
TF
90,000
90,000
0
Capacity Building for Malta Enterprise
TF
400,000
400,000
0
Capacity Building programme in Information Security
TF
695,000
646,500
48,500
Strengthening capacity in the field of interpretation
TF
148,000
111,000
37,000
Strengthening capacity in the field of translation
TF
215,250
211,500
3,750
TOTAL
4,578,250
4,489,000
89,250
EU TRANSITION FACILITY FUNDS YEAR 2004
FUNDS (EUR)
 
19 
 
Pre-Accession Funds 
 
Even here, the EU Commission, , has granted to each of the accession 
countries, the opportunity not to lose on funds attached to works in 
progress and which, therefore, had not yet been utilised by date of 
accession.  
 
Malta, therefore, will benefit from the global amount of Lm7 million 
over these three years on projects and programmes that are in 
progress. 
 
These programmes include: 
 
- 
technical assistance for strengthening administrative and 
institutional capacity in the  areas of taxation, regional policy, 
health and safety at work, costal management, standards, the 
environment, agriculture and fisheries, safety at sea, and 
medicinal regulatory framework; 
- 
the waste water treatment plant in Gozo; 
- 
viability and environmental impact assessments studies on 
infrastructural transport projects. 
 
Other details may be found on Table 9 which is attached. 
 
 
On-going work to attract more funding over 2007-2013 
 
Technical discussions are currently in place at various levels of the EU 
Commission on its proposals for the new Financial Perspective for 
2007-2013.  The purpose of these discussions is for member states to 
look into this perspective not only from its national point of view but 
also from a global view to ensure that the proposed financing will 
match the realisation of the various political, economic and social EU 
priorities. 
Table No. 9
YEAR OF
2004
2005
2006
TOTAL
COMMITMENT
EURO
EURO
EURO
EURO
2000
141,870
-
-
141,870
2001
2,005,934
-
-
2,005,934
2002
2,000,000
1,000,000
-
3,000,000
2003(A)
-
2,500,000
8,059,000
10,559,000
TOTAL
4,147,804
3,500,000
8,059,000
15,706,804
                                              (A)   Euro 2.441 million were paid in advance in 2003
PRE-ACCESSION FUNDS
 
21 
 
These priorities are brought together under 5 headings, that is: 
 
1. 
Sustainable growth: 
(a)  Competitiveness for growth and employment, 
(b)  Cohesion for growth and employment, 
2. 
The protection and management of natural resources, 
3. 
Citizenship, freedom, security and justice, 
4. 
The EU as a global partner, 
5. 
Administrative expenditure. 
 
As I already stated, these are early discussions.  However, a number 
of issues have already been raised by the individual members states 
that address both the global scene and the national interest - among 
them Malta.  However, these issue are still on the principle level, that 
is, the allocation of funds to the individual member states for each to 
know how best it could attain economic and social convergence has 
not yet been discussed.  One should well mention that Malta is 
expected to remain a net beneficiary over the 2007 -2013 period.  This 
means that it will continue to benefit from EU funds more than it will 
pay out to the budget. 
 
 
Malta’s Contributions the EU Budget 
 
Contributions from the 25 member states to the EU budget make up 
its only source of revenues. 
 
There are 4 sources of contribution, that is, import duties from third 
countries and on which we retain 25% for administrative expenses 
and pass the rest to the EU; VAT-based and GNI based resources: 
these are the two sources of contributions whose workings are very 
complex, and the UK rebate which is highly controversial and on 
which there are current discussions for its review towards a more 
equal and fair equation. Finally, there is the contribution to the 
 
22 
reserves which are three, that is, the monetary reserve, the loan 
guarantee reserve, and the emergency aid reserve.  Contributing 
towards these reserves is also made on the GNI base. 
 
Malta’s contribution in current prices for 2004-2006 will be around 
Lm59 million.  In Table 5, I am providing indications of the funds that 
will be accessible for Malta and those which it has to contribute to the 
EU. 
 
 
Funds under the 5th Italo-Maltese Financial Protocol 
 
Another source for funds for Malta is that agreed upon with the 
Italian government under the 5th Financial Protocol at the end of 2003 
and which has now been extended to 2007.   Under that agreement 
Malta will benefit for global grants amounting to Lm30 million which 
are tied to a number of projects that have been agreed with the Italian 
government. 
 
Malta will fork out Lm 2 million in addition to these funds. 
 
This global amount of Lm32 million will be spread over three years.  
Among the major projects that will be financed under this Protocol is 
the roads modernisation programme that is being implemented at a 
total cost of Lm13 million by the Ministry for Urban Development and 
Roads and by the Malta Transport Authority. 
 
Another major project with a global allocation of about Lm7 million is 
that of strengthening maritime surveillance under which the Armed 
Forces of Malta would be equipped with a modern patrol boat with a 
helicopter flight deck.  Moreover, spare parts will be purchased and 
training given to the crew for this patrol boat. 
 
23 
 
Another Lm5 million under this Financial Protocol have been 
allocated on the construction of incinerators at both civil abattoirs in 
Malta and Gozo.  This project is tied to Malta’s obligations under the 
Acquis Communitaire for the burning of all risk-carrying material.  
Improvements in the Gozo incinerator have been completed and a 
new mobile incinerator was purchased for the Malta abattoir.  Other 
works are ongoing on the commissioning of a new fixed incinerator at 
the same abattoir. 
 
Another Lm4 million will be allocated on the construction of a waste 
water treatment plant in the area known as iċ-Ċumnija in the north of 
Malta.  It is expected that the contract will be signed within a short 
time. 
 
Among the other projects to be financed under this financial protocol 
there is the design and provision of furniture, the provision and 
installation of a storage and logistic system at the new Mater Dei 
Hospital, the purchase of planned and technical assistance for the 
grading and the cold storage facilities at the Pitkali Central Station, 
repairs and restoration works on the 16th century organ and 
restoration on the Italian Language Chapel at St John’s Co-Cathedral, 
and the establishment of a Chair for Mediterranean and European 
Studies at the University of Malta. 
 
This protocol is expected to be the last in a series of financial 
assistance that the Italian government graciously provided to Malta 
over these last years. 
 
 
Public Debt and other Developments 
 
While substantial debt was brought forward from previous years the 
ever increasing borrowing needs for the administration to finance the 
annual national budget deficit over recent years continued to push up 
 
24 
the public debt levels.  Government budget deficit came about over 
recent years in support of continual development programmes in all 
the economic sectors and for social needs such as social benefits, 
health and education.  We could have stopped at doing anything and 
we would not have increased public debt. 
 
However, nobody can blame us of burdening future’s generations 
with undue debt.  Apart from the fact that government continues to be 
fully committed more than ever to put down the deficit in public 
finances and, therefore, the need for borrowing, the fact remains that 
all our current achievements and those for which we shall continue to 
provide through strong investment and at a great sacrifice will be 
done not only to improve our present quality of life but also to leave 
to our future generations a strong heritage so that they would 
continue to enjoy a strong and sustainable social system and a better 
quality of life in a developed country.  Therefore, it would not be 
unwelcome for future generations to share responsibility also for the 
creation of this wealth from which they would eventually benefit. 
 
General government debt during the current financial year is expected 
to increase to Lm1.4 billion or 73.2% of GDP.  This includes Lm1.3 
billion debt in the consolidated fund and around another Lm100 
million in public entities that fall under the general government 
among them the debt assumed by government last year following the 
restructuring at the shipyards. 
 
Public debt servicing costs this year are expected to reach Lm83 
million for which Lm73 million for domestic debt and the rest for 
foreign debt. 
 
Public debt next year is expected to increase by another Lm115 million 
making up government’s borrowing needs to finance its cumulative 
deficit.  From this amount the Council of Europe Development Bank is 
expected to provide Lm15 million under existing credit facilities for 
financing works at the Mater Dei Hospital. 
 
25 
 
Next year therefore the Public Debt ratio is expected to be 72% of 
GDP. 
 
One may well mention here that, from a total public debt balance of 
Lm1.4 billion, around Lm71 million or 5% makes up foreign debt.  
This means that the remaining public debt or the other 95% continues 
to be part of the local economy and interests net of local tax, will go 
back to the local investors for them to spend back into the local 
economy.  While I do to minimise this problem in any way I may say, 
therefore that the impact on the local economy takes a different 
dimension. 
 
With regard to the sustainability of public debt, my government has 
two alternatives:  either of cutting down on public costs without 
compromising development, social benefits and wages and family 
income:  or to promote more cost effectiveness in the public sector by 
improving productivity and attaining economic objectives with more 
competitiveness and less costs.  Government has opted for a mix of 
both through a number of social and structural reforms which I have 
already mentioned. 
 
In this way, Government is committed to reduce the public debt 
balance as a percentage of GDP from 73.2% this year to 70.4% in 2007.  
This also partially reflects GDP growth which is expected to be faster 
than that of public debt. 
 
 
Other Government Guaranteed Debt 
 
As much as my government is committed to reduce the deficit ratio, it 
is equally wholly against adopting a liberal policy providing 
guarantees to public entities for credit facilities.  Evidence of this 
arises from the fact that government guarantees to public entities over 
the last 5 years have decreased from Lm456 million to Lm343 million 
 
26 
by last September of which not less than Lm106 million are tied to 
loans of the Malta Freeport Corporation, for the construction of 
terminal 2, and which the Corporation would be in a better position to 
repay from the privatisation receipts of Malta Freeport Terminals Ltd., 
another Lm77.7 million that are tied to Enemalta Corporation loans 
for the construction of the Delimara Power Station, and another Lm40 
million that are tied to loans of the former Malta Drydocks 
corporation. 
 
The remaining 33% of Government Guarantees Debt are spread over 
other public entities including the Water Services Corporation which 
has a guarantee of not less than Lm26 million that are tied to loans for 
the reverse osmosis plants. 
 
 
Investment and the Policy for Fiscal Consolidation 
 
Malta’s share of public investment measured as a percentage of GDP 
has increased in the last few years.  This stands in contrast with the 
experience of other industrialised countries including the majority of 
EU member states. 
 
The decline in public investment as a share of GDP is usually 
attributed to various factors but in particular to the level of economic 
and structural development of a country, the process of involving the 
private sector in public projects both in terms of public-private 
partnerships and in pure privatisation, and on the tendency of 
governments to consolidate their public finances. 
 
In Malta’s case public investment is not decreasing because the 
economic and structural development process is still taking place with 
the government allocating a significant amount of resources for the 
supply of public goods and services.  While having a direct bearing on 
the general welfare of the general public, Some of these investments, 
are not economically viable for the private sector to undertake as 
 
27 
private projects.  Investments that are environmentally oriented are a 
case in point.  However, the experience of the majority of the 
European countries is indicating that there are construction and 
operations of major infrastructure projects that are jointly being made 
with the private sector through the so-called public-private 
partnerships (PPP). 
 
PPP investments should lessen the burden of the borrowing 
requirements of government, as the capital spending will fall outside 
the government budget, and it should increase the investment 
opportunities of the private sector, with the possibility of attracting 
foreign direct investment if the projects undertaken are of a certain 
scale.  In addition, public projects carried out in this way, will no 
longer have any of the classical ‘crowding-out’ effects on private 
investment through higher interest rates.  On the contrary, if certain 
public projects serve as intermediate inputs to private sector activities 
they will be exerting a positive ‘crowding-in’ effect via increases in 
productivity and investment opportunities. 
 
A reduction in public investment therefore, as a result of increased 
participation of the private sector and of more privatisation should 
help government efforts towards fiscal consolidation without any 
negative impact on the economy. 
 
Not only, that but where fiscal consolidation takes place there is also 
economic growth.  This was experienced by various EU Member 
States wherein fiscal consolidation provided expansion in their 
economy.  Studies show that, during these periods, even on the short-
term, wherever governments put in place a financial policy through 
fiscal rationalisation, both consumption and private investment stood 
to grow.  This, because both consumers and investors look forward 
and increase their expectations with economic growth.  In this regard 
fiscal consolidation will reduce, as I explained will reduce 
government’s borrowing needs and the possibility for more taxation. 
 
 
1 
Appendix ‘C’ 
 
 
RESTRUCTURING OF PUBLIC ENTITIES 
 
Public entities and enterprises have grown in size and in scope in 
recent years.  Their operations however, have grown to depend more 
and more on the commercial realities and it is a known fact that a 
public entity is much less capable, of responding to commercial and 
financial realities than the private sector. 
 
There is a growing need, therefore, for reform and restructuring in 
some of these enterprises.  The public sector reform programme which 
is taking place is directed towards the continual improvements in 
their level of services, and towards increasing the efficiency and 
productivity in the operations of these entities so these will reduce 
their dependency on public funds, and instead contribute to the 
growth in the competitiveness of our country without losing their 
social obligations.  It was time for the structured loss of millions of 
pounds every year to be addressed in a number of entities such as the 
Shipyard, Air Malta, Gozo Channel Co. Ltd. and Public Broadcasting 
Services.  Apart from controls in administrative costs, a very 
important link in this exercise was the need to downsize the 
workforce in these entities to one that meets their operational needs. 
 
Obviously, this process of reform is not an easy one:  it demands 
determination, consistency, good judgement and long-term vision.  
However, it demands also the capacity and the will for continued 
renewal which one expects from an enterprise with a competitive and 
crucial role in the economy. 
 
 
2 
The Shipyard 
 
The Shipyard has always been an entity that every year absorbed 
huge 
subsidies. 
 
Notwithstanding 
this, 
government’s 
and 
management’s strong commitments led on the road towards bringing 
the shipyards on the realistic environment of the globalised world.  
This commitment is already showing results.  Financial estimates for 
the first nine months of the year show the Shipyard making Lm1 
million less in losses than those originally projected.  This is progress 
towards our goals to bring the yard on a commercially viable path.  
Management is making strong efforts to attract work and the majority 
of the workforce appears to have understood the need for change.  
Next year is expected to be particularly difficult as we face stiff 
competition from Turkish and Croatian shipyards.  For us to win this 
challenge, we need on the one hand, to penetrate new markets and on 
the other hand to understand the need to increase production more 
than we have already done this year. 
 
In order to continue increasing the potential of this industry, 
government is investing Lm1 million this year for the purchase of 
much needed equipment which the Shipyard is currently leasing.  
 
Meanwhile, a number of investors have expressed a strong interest to 
develop the site at Marsa previously housing the Malta Shipbuilding 
Co. Ltd.  Government has set up a commission made up of all 
interested parties to make recommendations for the best way forward.  
The final report is expected by next February. 
 
 
Gozo Channel Co. Ltd 
 
Even here we had encouraging results as a Lm1 million annual loss 
was brought down to Lm27,000 by last September – a result that 
includes a government subsidy of Lm700,000 for the reduced tariff 
 
3 
rates for Gozitan commuters.  In fact, government will next year 
provide for a similar subsidy that will be increased to Lm1.4 million.  
 
One should well note here that notwithstanding the polemics that 
arose around the increase in tariff rates, passenger load has increased 
by 50,000 while the carriage of cars has gone up to 10,000 when 
compared to last year.  A night service was also introduced for the 
months between October and May in order to ensure service 
continuity.  However, this service is poorly patronised.  The 
additional costs for this service are wholly subsidised by the 
government. 
 
Meanwhile, Gozo Channel is also undertaking internal reforms to 
review its operational costs downwards and in this way achieve more 
commercial sustainability. 
 
 
Air Malta Co. Ltd 
 
The restructuring exercise at Air Malta Co. Ltd that was started in the 
summer of last year, continued to be implemented and consolidated 
during the year.  The main points of this exercise are: 
 
- 
the unfolding of a strategic plan tied to a business plan with 
the aim of making the company profitable by 2008.  This plan 
should ensure that the company focuses on its core business 
and that it divests itself from its other subsidiaries among 
them its shareholding in three hotels; 
- 
the implementation of a complete restructuring exercise in 
management where we are ensuring responsibilities in order 
to provide more accountability in the management of the 
company; 
- 
an agreement that we made with the four unions representing 
the company’s workforce of a defined rescue plan spread over 
 
4 
three years to reduce costs at the rate of Lm1 million per 
annum; 
- 
a recapitalisation of Lm30 million in the company; 
- 
the implementation of an IT system that would include the 
latest communications and information technologies in the 
aviation sector and the latest aviation technology; and 
- 
the development of an important service for the company with 
the first successful attempt being made last March with low 
cost flights to Standsted Airport, the 5th Freedom Operation on 
the Catania/Gatwick route, and the 7th Freedom Operation 
between Manchester and Birmingham and other destinations. 
 
In the first months of this reform programme, it appears that the 
established goals were being attained.  However, it is still early to 
speak about having reached our goals completely particularly in this 
period of great uncertainty for the international price of oil. 
 
 
Public Broadcasting Services 
 
PBS was losing about Lm250,000 every year notwithstanding a Lm2 
million annual subsidy from government.  It was clear that 
government could not continue to provide these funds and, therefore, 
there was universal agreement on the need of restructuring. 
 
After agreement was reached with the GWU, employees were offered 
voluntary redundancy schemes and redeployment so that their 
numbers were drastically reduced.  A new collective agreement which 
provided more flexibility was also reached.  Thus, the base for reform 
to take place was in place.  Like in any other reform, the start was met 
with a number of handicaps.  However, I am confident that results 
will show during the next year. 
 
5 
 
All I can say is that the first results are quite encouraging.  The first 
financial results show that PBS ended its financial year with a trading 
profit of around Lm200,000 when two years back it had registered a 
trading loss of Lm250,000.  This shows an improvement of Lm500,000 
in less than one year.  For the first time this year, PBS will operate 
without the Lm2 million subsidy and, therefore, the challenge it faces 
becomes even bigger. 
 
 
Enemalta Corporation 
 
Government is undertaking a corporate restructuring programme 
aimed at the corporation to reflect the needs of its clients and those of 
the country.  The main points of this programme are: 
 
- 
the corporation will be given an organisational structure:  an 
exercise will be concluded for the recruitment of new top 
management.  Presently the process has started for the 
selection of middle management.  We are currently 
undertaking a skills and manpower audit to determine the best 
level of employees in terms of numbers; 
- 
an internal audit system will be set up; 
- 
a basic reform of the financial systems in order to update the 
current systems and ensure financial efficiency.  The first step 
was to unbundled Enemalta’s accounts so that the corporation 
would provide a clear picture of its operations; 
- 
the Malta Oil Bunkering Co. Ltd will be reintegrated with the 
Corporation in order to strengthen the storage facilities and 
provide it with the possibility of releasing capacity which is 
not of immediate use; 
- 
all necessary studies are in place in order to provide for a 
modern system of information and technology to provide for 
digital meters and the use of power lines to carry data together 
with a complete integration to systems at the Enterprise 
 
6 
Resources Planning and Customer Relationship Management 
as well as with the billing and accounts systems. 
 
 
Winding Down of Companies 
 
As part of government’s plans to reduce its role and make it that is 
wholly related to governance, government is winding down a number 
of public entities whose primary functions have now become absolete.  
Medigrain Ltd as well as Malta Export Credit Co. Ltd therefore, will 
next year stop operations.   
 
 
Malta Tourism Authority 
 
A report on the restructuring of the Malta Tourism Authority was 
drawn up by the consultancy and auditing firm of Deloitte & Touche.  
Tourism continues to be a very important sector in the economy with 
potential for growth.  The Malta Tourism Authority is one of the most 
important public institutions in the economy and, therefore, the need 
arose for an internal examination of its efficiencies. 
 
It is very relevant that the Authority focuses more on the market 
dimension and for it to be organised to provide timely response to 
new trends and opportunities.  The tourism sector has the potential 
for growth as long as we co-ordinate and strengthen our efforts. 
 
It is government’s intent to publish this report and to provide for wide 
consultations with the Opposition before moving towards the 
implementation stage. 
 
 
 
1 
Appendix ‘D’ 
 
 
PRIVATISATION 
 
Government, next year, intends to continue with its current policy of 
selling out to the private sector those areas which are neither 
commercial nor strategic, or where they are, the private sector would 
manage better and at a lower cost.   
 
The term ‘privatisation’ is being applied in the broadest way possible.  
In some instances, government sells all its shareholding in an 
enterprise as in the case of Mid-Med Bank, or else it sells part of its 
shareholding as in the case of Maltapost.  In other instances, 
government goes into strategic alliances as in the case of Microsoft 
and Hewlett Packard or leases out facilities as in the case of Malta 
Freeport.  Finally, government makes use of other tools such as in the 
case of the public private partnership for the landscaping operations. 
 
After three years of negotiations, government has successfully 
completed the privatisation of Malta Freeport during the year.  The 
facilities at Malta Freeport were leased out to one of the largest 
shipping companies globally – the French CMA-CGM – which 
brought with it one of the largest world operators, P&O, for the all 
inclusive price of US$421 million spread over thirty years.  Moreover, 
the new operators have agreed to invest in new plant in order to 
increase transhipment operations at the Freeport from 1.3 million 
containers to 2.3 million containers annually.  This should contribute 
towards creating new employment and growth in the economy. 
 
The Privatisation Unit is currently working on two privatisation 
processes which are Maltacom and the Bank of Valletta.  In regard to 
Maltacom, government intends to sell out all its shareholding to a 
strategic partner.  Government is opting for this strategy as the 
telecommunications industry is fast approaching global consolidation 
 
2 
while the future expansion for Maltacom is built on huge investment 
in product development and in new services that would offset the 
gradual decline in fixed telephony.  It is not government’s intent to 
sell its shareholding to any investor who may perhaps not have the 
right expertise in the area of telecommunications.  Government wants 
to have a strategic partner in this area who invests in Malta and in the 
Maltese. 
 
This applies also for the Bank of Valletta, for which it is now public 
knowledge that agreement has been reached with the other major 
shareholder, the Banco di Sicilia, to sell out their combined 
shareholding. 
 
Government’s first priority, is that in the prospective strategic partner, 
government would seek the right commitment towards further 
growth of the bank which has a key role in our economy. 
 
It is hoped that these two processes will be completed next year 
provided that the bids that government would have for its 
consideration will provide the best offer to provide for more 
negotiations. 
 
Government is also seeking the privatisation of Sea Malta Co. Ltd.  
The Privatisation Unit is currently undertaking negotiations with two 
prospective buyers who would carry the contractual obligations 
under the Public Service Obligation Agreement that government has 
signed with the company in order to ensure the operations of the sea-
route between Malta and the South of Italy.  Government, this year, 
has also successfully completed negotiations on Fort Chambray in 
Gozo.  Government has here sold out all its shareholding in Fort 
Chambray Ltd for the price of Lm1.2 million while negotiations are 
currently in progress for the renewal of the emphyteutical grant with 
the new Gozitan investor. 
 
 
3 
Government is also reviewing its position in the Kordin Grain 
Terminal, in Maltapost, and in the Libyan Arab Maltese Holding Co. 
Ltd. 
 
This is a vast and ambitious programme.  However, we are 
determined to see it through.  This privatisation programme is not set 
for completion in one year but will be spread over a number of years. 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENTS 
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
TAX REVENUE
Direct    -     Income Tax
213,800,000
209,870,000
- 
3,930,000 
Shortfall registered in view of increase in refunds and decrease in the
expected revenue from final withholding tax.
                    Social Security
194,600,000
194,000,000
- 
600,000 
Marginal decrease against the original estimate; one third of the amount
represents State Contribution.
Indirect  -  Customs and Excise
69,240,000
65,340,000
- 
3,900,000 
                    Duties
                   Licences, Taxes and Fines
108,402,000
102,260,000
- 
6,142,000 
Lower receipts than expected from gaming taxes and motor vehicle
registration tax.
                   
                   Value Added Tax
140,500,000
140,500,000
- 
- 
TOTAL TAX REVENUE
726,542,000
711,970,000
-
14,572,000
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2004 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO THE APPROVED ESTIMATES
Shortfall is expected against the original estimate for import duties in
view of the adoption of the CET after 1 May 2004, and because of
increase in imports from European Union countries.
~ i ~
02/12/2004
19:44
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2004 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO THE APPROVED ESTIMATES
NON-TAX REVENUE
Fees of Office
9,035,000
6,458,000
- 
2,577,000
The expected revenue from eco-contribution did not materialise as the law
came into force late in the year.
Reimbursements
7,916,000
8,184,000
268,000
- 
Public Corporations
3,233,000
2,483,000
- 
750,000
No contribution by Enemalta is expected by the end of the year.
Central Bank of Malta
17,000,000
18,233,000
1,233,000
- 
Year 2003 actual profits passed to Government.
Rents
10,015,000
12,845,000
2,830,000
- 
Increase due to payment of rent arrears by MATS.
Dividends on Investment
4,130,000
5,500,000
1,370,000
- 
Expected increase in dividends from Government investments.
Repayment of Government Loans and
Interest
423,000
423,000
- 
- 
Grants
51,195,000
37,411,000
- 
13,784,000
Implementation of programmes financed by the Italian Financial Protocol
and the European Union will continue in 2005.
Miscellaneous Receipts
13,511,000
20,686,000
7,175,000
- 
Increase in miscellaneous receipts.
Total Non-Tax Revenue
116,458,000
112,223,000
- 
4,235,000
TOTAL RECURRENT 
REVENUE
843,000,000
824,193,000
-
18,807,000
~ ii ~
02/12/2004
19:44
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2004 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO THE APPROVED ESTIMATES
NON-ORDINARY REVENUE
Sale of shares
35,000,000
0
- 
35,000,000
The process of government's privitisation programme will continue in
2005.
Sinking Funds of converted loans
9,000,000
9,000,000
- 
- 
Local Loans
0
100,000,000
100,000,000
- 
Local loans raised to finance the deficit in the Consolidated Fund.
Foreign Loans
12,500,000
0
- 
12,500,000
No use has been made of this facility during 2004.
TOTAL NON-ORDINARY 
REVENUE
56,500,000
109,000,000
52,500,000
- 
GRAND TOTAL
899,500,000
933,193,000
33,693,000
- 
~ iii ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
1 Office of the President
684,000 
732,000 
48,000 
- 
2 House of Representatives
1,088,000 
1,096,000 
8,000 
- 
3 Office of the Ombudsman
170,000 
170,000 
- 
- 
4 National Audit Office
875,000 
825,000 
- 
50,000 
Contribution was lower than forecasted.
5 Office of the Prime Minister
5,650,000 
5,361,000 
- 
289,000 
Higher expenditure than expected under the Personal Emoluments and
Operational and Maintenance Expenses categories was offset by lower
expenditure under Programmes and Initiatives and Contributions to
Government Entitites.
6 Public Service Commission
148,000 
146,000 
- 
2,000 
7 Armed Forces of Malta
13,100,000 
12,966,000 
- 
134,000 
Higher expenditure than originally forecasted under the Operational
and Maintenance Expenses category, in connection with the Global
Marine Distress and Safety System, was offset by lower expenditure
under the Personal Emoluments category.
8 Information
614,000 
597,000 
- 
17,000 
9 Government Printing Press
593,000 
596,000 
3,000 
- 
10 Electoral Office
1,518,000 
1,716,000 
198,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than expected under the Electoral Commission
Activities Programme.
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
~ iv ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
11 Ministry for Social Policy
5,273,000 
5,467,000 
194,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally projected
mainly under the
Contributions to Government Entities category, to cover running
expenses.
12 Social Security
67,340,000 
67,115,000 
- 
225,000 
The State Contribution will not be required in full by the end of the
year.
13 Social Security Benefits
206,500,000 
206,500,000 
- 
- 
14 Family and Social Welfare
676,000 
720,000 
44,000 
- 
15 Care of the Elderly and Community Services
13,580,000 
13,642,000 
62,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally anticipated under the Operational
and Maintenance Expenses category, mainly under 'Materials &
Supplies', 'Transport' and 'Contractual Services', was partly offset by
lower expenditure under the Personal Emoluments and Programmes
and Initiatives categories.
16 Housing
1,250,000 
1,232,000 
- 
18,000 
17 Industrial and Employment Relations
608,000 
591,000 
- 
17,000 
18 Ministry of Education
37,405,000 
39,047,000 
1,642,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Programmes and Initiatives and Contributions to
Government Entities categories was higher than expected under this
Vote.
19 Education
49,718,000 
50,027,000 
309,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Personal Emoluments category was higher than
originally projected.
~ v ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
20 Libraries and Archives
700,000 
682,000 
- 
18,000 
21 Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs
27,634,000 
24,500,000 
- 
3,134,000 
Higher expenditure than originally forecasted under the Operational
and Maintenance Expenses category offset by lower expenditure than
expected under the other categories.
22 Treasury
8,147,000 
8,408,000 
261,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Programmes and Initiatives category was higher
than originally forecasted.
23 Pensions
30,762,000 
28,801,000 
- 
1,961,000 
Lower expenditure as a result of a variance from the original
projections in respect of retirements.
24 Inland Revenue
5,887,000 
5,303,000 
- 
584,000 
Lower expenditure than anticipated primarily under the Programmes
and Initiatives category.
25 Customs
5,886,000 
5,527,000 
- 
359,000 
Expenditure under the Programmes and Initiatives category, mainly
under 'EU Pre-Accession Programmes', was lower than originally
expected.
26 V.A.T.
3,246,000 
3,319,000 
73,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than expected under various categories partly offset
by lower expenditure under the Contributions to Government Entities
category.
27 Contracts
362,000 
380,000 
18,000 
- 
28 Economic Policy
573,000 
651,000 
78,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Contributions to Government Entities category 
was higher than originally expected.
~ vi ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
29 Commerce
8,581,000 
7,077,000 
- 
1,504,000 
Increased requirements by way of Government subsidy in connection
with grain importation were offset by lower expenditure within the
same category.
30 Consumer and Competition
471,000 
486,000 
15,000 
- 
31 Ministry for Tourism
2,530,000 
2,487,000 
- 
43,000 
32 Ministry for Transport and Communications
6,398,000 
7,532,000 
1,134,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally anticipated under the Guaranteed
Earnings Agreement with the Public Transport Association and under
the Operational and Maintenance Expenses category was partly offset
by lower expenditure under the EU Pre-Accession Programmes.
33 Civil Aviation
561,000 
561,000 
- 
- 
34 Ministry for Justice and Home Affairs
2,662,000 
2,848,000 
186,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Personal Emoluments and the Programmes and
Initiatives categories was higher than originally expected.
35 Judicial
3,683,000 
3,694,000 
11,000 
- 
36 Local Councils
11,097,000 
10,543,000 
- 
554,000 
Lower expenditure in the Programmes and Initiatives category.
37 Police
16,167,000 
16,397,000 
230,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally forecasted under the Operational
and Maintence Expenses category, mainly under 'Utilities', 'Transport'
and 'Contractual Services', was partly offset by lower expenditure under
Personal Emoluments.
~ vii ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
38 Correctional Services
2,386,000 
2,528,000 
142,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally envisaged under the Personal
Emoluments category.
39 Civil Protection
1,377,000 
1,410,000 
33,000 
- 
40 Government Property Division
1,395,000 
1,416,000 
21,000 
- 
41 Registration
814,000 
918,000 
104,000 
- 
Expenditure under the Personal Emoluments and Operational and
Maintenance Expenses categories was higher than expected.
42 Ministry for Resources and Infrastructure
20,329,000 
21,414,000 
1,085,000 
- 
Higher expenditure under the Personal Emoluments category.
43 Ministry for Gozo
20,162,000 
20,230,000 
68,000 
- 
Higher requirements under the Operational and Maintenance Expenses
and Programmes and Initiatives categories were partly offset by lower
expenditure under the Personal Emoluments category.
44 Ministry of Health
71,931,000 
76,621,000 
4,690,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than expected in respect of Personal Emoluments
and
the procurement of
medicine (under the Operational and
Maintenance Expenses category) was partly offset by lower expediture
under the Programmes and Initiatives and Contributions to Government
Entities categories.
45 Ministry for Information Technology               
and Investment
41,198,000 
41,626,000 
428,000 
- 
Higher expenditure than originally expected under the Contributions to
Government Entities category was partly offset by lower expenditure
under the Programmes and Initiatives category.
~ viii ~
02/12/2004
19:44
 
Approved
Revised by
Remarks
Estimate
Finance
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
               Variation
STATEMENT  B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2004: REVISED COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
46 Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
10,054,000 
9,767,000 
- 
287,000 
Higher
expenditure
than
projected
under
the
Operational
and
Maintenance Expenses category was offset by lower expenditure under
the Personal Emoluments and Contributions to Government Entities
categories.
47 Ministry for Rural Affairs and                         
the Environment
22,612,000 
20,487,000 
- 
2,125,000 
Expenditure under the Programmes and Initiatives category (primarily
EU Pre-Accession Programmes) and the Contribution to Government
Entities
category
was lower than
originally anticipated, whilst
requirements under the
Operational and
Maintenance Expenses
category were higher than originally expected.
48 Ministry for Youth and the Arts
4,842,000 
4,659,000 
- 
183,000 
Higher expenditure than originally forecasted under various categories
was
offset
by
lower
expenditure
under
the
Contributions
to
Government Entities category.
739,237,000 
738,818,000 
419,000 
49 Public Debt Servicing
85,680,000 
123,494,000 
37,814,000 
- 
Expenditure in respect of ex-Shipyards' Direct Loan repayments
(replaced by the issue of Malta Government Stocks) and requirements
for new Malta Government Stocks issues, was partly offset by lower
expenditure in respect of Short-term borrowing.
TOTAL
824,917,000 
862,312,000 
37,395,000 
~ ix ~
02/12/2004
19:44
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
I
Office of the Prime Minister
6,486,000
6,442,000
- 
44,000
II
Ministry for Social Policy
3,277,000
3,041,000
- 
236,000
Funds allocated for St Vincent de Paule's Residence and for interest
subsidy on house loans will not be utilised during the current year.
Higher expenditure will materialise on information technology projects.
III
Ministry of Education 
7,393,000
5,568,000
- 
1,825,000
Lower expenditure is expected on programmes financed by the European
Union and projects undertaken by MCAST, Foundation for Tomorrow's
Schools and Education Division.
IV
Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Affairs
5,985,000
5,857,000
- 
128,000
Lower expenditure regarding EU financed projects. Higher expenditure
on Information Technology is anticipated.
V
Ministry for Tourism
9,614,000
9,084,000
- 
530,000
Approved Estimates are not expected to be fully used by year end.
VI
Ministry for Transport and 
Communications
17,630,000
10,059,000
- 
7,571,000
Expenditure is expected to be less than that originally anticipated due to
EU
programmes and Roads' projects financed under the V Italian
Protocol as well as those locally sourced, and on the subsidy of the
procurement of new route buses. 
VII Ministry for Justice and Home 
Affairs
3,086,000
5,313,000
2,227,000
- 
Payment on contracts for the acquisition of land by Government resulted
in higher expenditure.
VIII Ministry for Resources and 
Infrastructure
5,711,000
4,175,000
- 
1,536,000
Funds on EU programmes and Proġett Skart will not be utilised in full
this year. 
IX
Ministry for Gozo
3,618,000
1,993,000
- 
1,625,000
Allocated funds for the Sewage Treatment Plant and for EU programmes
will not be wholly utilised.
STATEMENT C
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2004:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
~ x ~
02/12/2004
19:44
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
Lm
Lm
Lm
Lm
STATEMENT C
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2004:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
X
Ministry of Health
44,267,000
29,483,000
- 
14,784,000
Lower expenditure is expected on the construction of the new hospital
and on the project funded under the V Italian Protocol.
XI
Ministry for Information 
Technology and Investment
13,417,000
15,255,000
1,838,000
- 
Although expenditure under the Malta North Sewage Treatment Plant is
expected to be lower, expenditure related to Government Investments will
be higher than originally forecast.
XII Ministry of Foreign Affairs
400,000
8,440,000
8,040,000
- 
Higher expenditure resulted due to the acquisition of property in Tripoli
and Brussels.
XIII Ministry for Rural Affairs and 
the Environment
4,401,000
3,718,000
- 
683,000
Lower expenditure on the projects financed under the EU and the V
Italian Protocol.
XIV Ministry for Youth and the Arts
1,371,000
1,147,000
- 
224,000
Expenditure on EU financed projects is expected to materialise next year.
TOTAL CAPITAL 
EXPENDITURE
126,656,000
109,575,000
- 
17,081,000
~ xi ~
02/12/2004
19:44
