B U D G E T
S P E E C H
2 0 2 2
CLYDE CARUANA
MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND EMPLOYMENT
Malta
Budget Speech 
2022
Hon. Clyde Caruana
Ministry for Finance and Employment
Malta
11th October, 2021
Printed at the Government Press
 Price:  €2.00        
Published by the
Ministry for Finance and Employment,
South Street,
Valletta
VLT 1102
Tel.: (+356) 25998259
Website: http://www.mfin.gov.mt
Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Malta. Ministry for Finance and Employment
Budget Speech, 2022 / Clyde Caruana.
Valletta: Ministry for Finance and Employment, 2021
ISBN: 978-99957-58-54-7
1. Budget - Malta
I. Title  
 
II. Clyde Caruana
This publication is available from the
Department of Information,
3, Castille Palace,
Valletta
VLT 2000
Tel.: (+356) 22001700
i
Contents
                                                                                                                                   
page
1. A Valiant Malta ..................................................................................................................... 1
2. A Socially Conscious Malta ............................................................................................ 5
3. A Hardworking Malta......................................................................................................27
4. An Ambitious Malta.........................................................................................................38
5. A Malta that is Pleasant to Live In.............................................................................56
6. A Modern Malta.................................................................................................................70
7. A Healthy Malta.................................................................................................................80
8. A Just Malta.........................................................................................................................85
9. The Malta of Tomorrow...........................................................................................................92
1
1. A Valiant Malta 
The 9th of March 2020 was the day when, in Northern Italy, 25 
million people went into lockdown. It was also the day when 
we as Maltese people and we as a Government, along with the 
rest of Europe, realised that this disease that was spreading in 
China and which we had been hearing about in the news, was 
no longer a remote concern but was now among us.
Within a short time, we had to understand what was happening. 
We had to face the reality of what was looming over us. We 
realised that this would be the challenge of our generation.
Who would have thought that, two months into the new 
administration, we would be facing such a major challenge 
warning us that thousands of Maltese and Gozitan people might 
die if we did nothing, and where we had to consider closing our 
airport and, along with it, a third of our country’s economy.
Who would have thought that we would be discussing issues such 
as whether the country would have sufficient food resources, 
and from where could we source oxygen, medical equipment 
and medical supplies without which many people, especially our 
elderly – our parents and grandparents – would die.
No Prime Minister in Malta’s history has had to deal with the 
decisions that faced our current Prime Minister in his first 
hundred days in office. I am proud to say that, not only were 
these challenges faced, but together we did a far better job than 
other countries that are much larger than us.
 
2
Had we not held fast, and had we bowed down to the pressure 
of those who wanted to bring the country to a grinding halt, we 
would have spent eighteen months in lockdown.
Had we listened to the advice of those who told us that granting 
assistance to businesses would be money down the drain, today 
we would have thousands of jobless people.
Had we done what the Nationalist Government did ten years 
ago, we would have told you it is what it is; we would have let 
you sink and handed you five lightbulbs for your home.
But we did not do that. Let the people judge those who left the 
country on its own, and those who, with a stroke fifty times as 
strong, were there to save businesses, workers and the country.
Because we were there, the labour market remained strong. The 
employment rate (20-64 years) in Malta in 2019 stood at 76.8%, 
while in the first quarter of 2021 this rate increased to 77.3%. 
The average employment rate in the European Union (EU27) 
throughout this period fell by 1.7 percentage points, whereas 
Malta’s corresponding figure increased by 0.5 percentage points.
Furthermore, Malta’s unemployment rate stood at 3.6% in 2019 
and fell to 3.2% in August 2021, while the average unemployment 
rate in the European Union increased from 6.7% to 6.8%. In 
2019, the rate of inactive population in Malta stood at 24.1%, 
decreasing to 23.0% in the first quarter of this year. This means 
that the reduction in the unemployment rate was not reflected 
as an increase in the inactive population rate.
3
Were we perfect? Which Government in the world was? Yet 
generally our country acted prudently all along. No limits were 
imposed on the health budget. Spend whatever is necessary, 
we said, because now is the time to save lives.  Perhaps we do 
not really appreciate what we had, and what we still have. Even 
simply taking a COVID-19 test while having no symptoms was 
free and fast. The same goes for the vaccination programme; 
we started before everyone else and became the best in Europe.
As in the Second World War, our country shone through the 
hardest moments. We can never be grateful enough to the 
Maltese and non-Maltese health care workers, the volunteers 
who provided support, our fellow Maltese who helped their 
elderly neighbours, all employees, from supermarket cashiers to 
the disciplinary corps who worked in impossible circumstances. 
All these people worked long hours so that this country could 
keep going.
This country is proud of you and grateful to you.
Other countries experienced drastic increases in unemployment 
and business failures, but in our country, we did not just settle for 
saving people’s lives; we wanted to save their livelihoods as well.
It is for this reason that this Government spent €1.5 billion for 
employees to safeguard their job. This tiny country, which is so 
mired in darkness according to the Opposition, was a role model 
for much larger countries, in this area as well.
4
The Malta that we want to leave to our children is the Malta 
that showed its face during the pandemic. A Malta with a social 
conscience, a hardworking Malta, and a fearless Malta.
This was the inspiration that guided this Budget, which will be 
presenting among the largest number of social measures ever 
seen in our country. This Budget will focus on the importance 
of economic development through investment in our country’s 
greatest resource our human capital - our people. Economic 
development must take place hand in hand with environmental 
development, and thus in this Budget we will also announce the 
largest financial package the Government has ever voted for the 
environment and sustainability.
Health will remain a priority, but we must also keep strengthening 
the justice, governance and security pillars.
We will not promise you heaven on earth, but we promise you 
that we will work with genuineness and determination so that 
the Malta that you want your children to inherit is made a reality.
5
2. A Socially Conscious Malta 
We believe that when a country is in a difficult situation, not 
only should one refrain from speaking with relish about higher 
utility bills, but it is the Government’s duty to help and support 
the people through such tough times. 
And help and support is precisely what we will provide.
Mr Speaker, the following is a list of increases in the social sphere 
that this Government is in a position to announce in this Budget:
2.1 Pension increases 
We will grant increases to all social security pensioners, at 
a cost of €24 million. 95,000 people who are in receipt of a 
retirement pension, a widows’ pension, an invalidity pension or 
a non-contributory age pension will benefit from an increase of 
€260 per year, or €5 per week, of which €1.75 will be the Cost of 
Living Adjustment (COLA) and €3.25 is the additional increase. 
2.2 Increased supplementary allowance 
In addition, we are increasing the supplementary allowance for all 
those entitled to this benefit, that is pensioners, elderly persons 
and also persons who are in employment as long as they do not 
have children under 16 years of age.
Married persons or couples whose income in 2022 does not 
exceed €14,318 will be receiving an increase in their benefit 
6
ranging from €3.47 to €6.50 per week depending on their 
income.
Single persons, including widowed persons, whose income in 
2022 does not exceed €10,221 will receive an increase ranging 
between €4.10 to €5.00 per week.
In all, this will benefit nearly 29,000 persons, at a cost of €5.6 
million per year.
This means that, by way of increases in pensions and 
supplementary allowances, many pensioners will see their 
income rising by over €500 each year. This increase is equivalent 
to an extra pension cheque over the year.
2.3 Adjustment of tax exemption on pension income 
We are raising the maximum amount of exempt pension income 
to €14,318 so that the pension increases we are granting are not 
taxed. 
Couples receiving a pension and opting for a married 
computation will be entitled to a further €3,600 in tax-exempt 
income from other sources. 
2.4 Adjustment of widows’ pension 
We will gradually adjust the widows’ pension rate to equate it to 
that previously received by their late spouse, and subsequently 
7
they would keep receiving all increases granted by the 
Government.
As a result, in 2022, 12,000 pensioners will benefit from a 
maximum weekly increase of €5, with a total expenditure of 
€3.3 million.
This means that pensioners who are on a widows’ pension and 
whose income does not exceed €10,221 will be getting increases 
ranging from €10 to €15 per week, equivalent to between €520 
and €780 annually.
2.5 Benefits for service pensioners 
We are once again increasing by €200 the portion of the 
service pension that will not be taken into consideration for the 
purposes of the social security pension assessment, such that 
the exempted amount for next year will increase to €3,066.
Service pensioners who are over 72 years of age, or who will 
reach the age of 72 during the year, will benefit from a further 
improvement in their social security pension, as the portion 
commuted into a gratuity will not be taken into consideration 
at all in their pension calculation. 
As a result, we will have completely fulfilled our promise to 
improve service pensions.
This will benefit 3,250 service pensioners at a total expense of 
€2.7 million.
8
2.6 The cost of living bonus to be paid in full to all
pensioners 
The cost of living bonus will be gradually paid in full to all 
pensioners who retired after 2008.
Thus in 2022, 43,000 pensioners will benefit from a maximum 
increase of €2.50 per week or €130 per year, at a cost of €2.5 
million.
2.7 A further increase for elderly persons who do not
qualify for a contributory pension 
We are granting an increase of €150 in the annual bonus for 
persons who have reached their retirement age but who do not 
qualify for a pension due to insufficient contributions.
As a result, the bonus payable to those with less than five 
years’ contributions will increase to €400 per year, while that 
for persons with over five years’ contributions will increase to 
€500 per year. 
About 12,500 persons, mostly women, will benefit from this 
increase at a total expenditure of almost €2 million.
This will be the fourth and largest increase in this bonus since 
we introduced it in 2015.
9
2.8 More free medicines and medical treatments 
The Government will continue to extend its formulary list by 
including:
•	
Oncology medicines for the treatment of various cancer 
types
•	
Osteoporosis treatment that will benefit around 20,000 
patients
•	
New medicines for the treatment of circulatory diseases, to 
benefit around 7,000 patients
•	
Psychiatric medicines that seeks to address the needs of 
around 5,000 patients and reduce the duration of hospital 
stays for psychiatric treatment
•	
New medicines for the treatment of fibromyalgia which will 
help around 2,600 beneficiaries
•	
Treatment of anaphylaxis, which is a severe allergic reaction 
that is potentially life-threatening, for the benefit of around 
1,400 patients. This treatment is to be provided in 325 schools 
to be administered to students in cases of emergency.
•	
Treatment for patients suffering from inflammatory diseases
•	
New medicines for the treatment of rare diseases
•	
Free medicines for IVF patients
2.8 Free medicines for persons aged 80 or over who
benefit from the supplementary allowance 
As from next year, elderly persons aged 80 or over who benefit 
from the supplementary allowance, as their income is below 
a certain level, will be eligible for free medical assistance 
(commonly known as the Pink Form, “il-Karta r-Roża”).
10
This will now apply without the need for such elderly persons 
to undergo a means test.
As a result, around 4,500 elderly persons will start benefiting 
from free medicines for the first time.
2.9 Increase in the grant for elderly citizens 
We will increase the grant for elderly persons aged 80 years or 
over, who are still living in the community or in a private care 
home, by €50 so that the grant will now reach €400 per year.
About 21,000 elderly persons will benefit from this increase, at 
a cost of €1 million.
May I remind you that this grant starts being paid at €300 yearly 
as soon as an elderly person reaches 75 years of age. Persons 
who benefit from the grant for those who do not qualify for a 
contributory pension but have paid some contributions, will 
receive both grants together.
2.10 Increase in the childbirth and adoption bonus 
We are increasing the bonus granted upon the birth or adoption 
of a child, which we introduced last year. The increase will be of 
€100, taking the bonus up from €300 to €400. Around 4,000 
parents are expected to benefit from this bonus.
11
2.11 Increase in the disabled child allowance 
We are increasing the disabled child allowance by €5, which will 
benefit around 1,700 families, at a total cost of €0.5 million. As 
a result, the allowance will reach €1,560 yearly.
The new rate will be almost double that paid in 2013. In fact, over 
the past eight years and including next year’s increase, we will 
have raised this allowance by over €13 weekly, or €676 annually.
2.12 Increase in the grant for carers of persons with a
severe disability
We are also increasing the Carer Grant paid for taking care of 
a person with a severe disability, which we introduced for the 
first time in last year’s Budget. This grant is increasing by €300, 
from €200 to €500.
To date, about 450 parents have benefited from this grant.
2.13 More help to people on social assistance 
We will give the full cost of living allowance to persons who rely 
on social benefits.
This means that about 7,000 beneficiaries of social assistance will 
start receiving the full Cost of Living Adjustment, and not two-
thirds of the compensation amount as was the case up to now.
We will also be introducing a new procedure whereby persons 
without a fixed address who receive a professional service from 
12
the FSWS will be granted social assistance, under constant 
supervision, so they can be better assisted in their needs until 
they join the workforce and eventually find a place to live.
 
2.14 Increase in the Carer at Home benefit 
We are increasing the annual Carer at Home benefit from €6,000 
to €7,000.
This measure will continue to make it easier for elderly persons 
to remain in the community while at the same time supporting 
informal carers to remain active in the workforce.
750 people benefit from this scheme, and the additional expense 
will be of nearly €1 million.
2.15 Increase in the subsidy rate of the Home Helper of
Your Choice scheme
We will also raise the subsidy rate of the Home Helper of Your 
Choice scheme, from €5.50 to €7 per hour, and hence incentivise 
more elderly persons to choose their own helper.
2.16 Addressing past injustices 
For the coming year, we are also allocating about €11 million to 
continue delivering on our promise to those who have suffered 
injustices in the past. These funds will finance grants being 
handed out under three different schemes.
13
These are earmarked for ex-port workers, former members of 
the forces (korpi), student workers and apprentices who joined 
the public sector after 1979, to ex-workers of the Gas Board, and 
to Malta Electricity Board apprentices who moved to Enemalta 
Corporation when this was set up in 1977.
Heirs of persons eligible under the three schemes will also benefit 
from these grants.
Mr Speaker, the measures that I have just announced make up 
a total increase of almost €70 million.
To those who were thinking that the Government was starting to 
run out of steam, we say that, not only are we not out of steam, 
but we have not even started yet.
2.17 Justice for pensioners upon inheritance distribution 
Mr Speaker,
Each year, according to law, payment of non-contributory 
pensions is halted in cases where there is an inheritance 
distribution, especially when this is in the form of donations to 
one’s children.
We will be proposing amendments to the law such that persons 
who receive an inheritance and who have been receiving a non-
contributory pension for at least five years will have their capital 
limit increased from €23,300 to €50,000 for married persons 
and from €14,000 to €30,000 for single persons.
14
Furthermore, donations up to a maximum of €20,000 granted to 
one’s children in a formal and legal manner, including donations 
of the airspace overlying property owned by the pensioner, will 
be excluded from the calculation of the pensioner’s capital.
These are situations which are relevant only to a small number 
of cases each year, but we believe that nobody should be left 
behind.
This is truly the social conscience of this Government, Mr Speaker.
2.18 Pension implications in separation cases 
We acknowledge that a number of married persons, especially 
women, are finding themselves in a difficult situation with 
regard to their pension entitlement if they become separated 
at a relatively older age. This happens mainly when one of the 
spouses, very often the woman, would have been out of the 
workforce for a long time in order to take care of the household 
and the family, resulting in missing contributions for the purposes 
of the pension calculation.
The Government is currently considering proposals for this 
situation to be addressed in a way that social justice is served to 
both spouses. We plan to give further details on this throughout 
the coming year. 
15
2.19 Further benefits for those who are not on a pension
yet 
This year we made amends to over 800 individuals, mostly 
women, who became eligible for a reduced retirement pension 
by taking into consideration the social security contributions 
they had paid when they were in employment before reaching 
19 years of age.
Nonetheless, there are still around 1,200 persons who paid 
at least ten years’ contributions but are not yet entitled to a 
pension as they did not pay any contributions from January 
1979 onwards. These individuals will also become eligible for the 
equivalent of the minimum two-thirds pension rate amounting 
to about €50 weekly, representing a total outlay of €3.2 million.
Persons who, according to official records, were in employment 
before the Employment and Training Corporation was set up 
in 1990 but no records are available as to any social security 
contributions paid during their employment, will be given the 
opportunity to pay up to five years’ missing contributions for 
the periods during which, according to official records, they 
were employed.
Furthermore, persons who have reached 59 years of age, have 
missing social security contributions and receive an invalidity 
pension, will also be entitled to pay up to five years’ outstanding 
contributions.
16
2.20 Measure for the benefit of part-time employees with
more than one job 
To help current employees get a better pension when they retire, 
we will be giving them the opportunity to start making social 
security contributions on more than one part-time job, up to a 
maximum of 40 hours per week. This measure will potentially 
benefit about 10,000 employees.
2.21 Payment of medical assistance to invalid persons
living with their parents 
Persons under 61 years of age who live with their parents and 
receive an invalidity pension are eligible for medical assistance 
if they satisfy a number of conditions related mainly to their and 
their parents’ capital income. If a person is eligible, the benefit 
is paid to the parents and not to him or her. This anomaly will 
be removed so that, in such cases, each applicant is considered 
separately, when only his or her income and capital are taken 
into account, and payment of the benefit is made directly to 
the applicant.
2.22 Removal of means test for severe disability assistance 
As a result of the reforms in recent years in the disability sector, 
the Government has introduced new benefits and boosted them 
through improvements in their conditions in order to provide 
more support to persons with disability and their families. This 
was done by, amongst other things, introducing three different 
benefit levels, with the highest level not being bound by a means 
test.
17
However, eligibility for the other two benefit levels is still 
dependent on a means test requirement for income that is not 
derived from employment. It is my pleasure to announce that 
this income means test will also be dropped as from January, 
such that no disability assistance will be subject to a means test.
2.23 Individuals entitled to an injury pension 
As from January 2022, we will be removing the legal restrictions 
affecting persons who suffer from a disability due to an injury 
on duty and who keep on working, to the effect that, as long 
as they continue working and receiving the injury pension, no 
deductions will be applied to any future benefits relating to 
sickness, unemployment or injury on duty for which they might 
be eligible.
2.24 Assistance for vulnerable children 
We are aware that our schools offer some respite for many 
unfortunate social realities. While poverty has declined 
significantly, it still exists. This Government continues to be 
committed to provide social mobility for everyone, but until 
this aim is reached we can never ignore children living in such 
circumstances. For this reason, we will be giving out a grant 
averaging €10,000 annually to the heads of all state schools, 
from kindergartens to secondary schools, with an outlay of 
€1 million which might be augmented if necessary, in order to 
ensure that the children under their supervision are not deprived 
from necessities such as food or other basic resources. We will 
ensure that these funds are available for use, while trusting the 
judgement of the heads of our schools.
18
Mr Speaker, we are doing this because we believe that, if there 
is just one boy or girl who experiences hunger in a relatively 
affluent society such as ours, we would have failed in our moral 
obligations as human beings. We believe in the principle of 
handing out fishing rods rather than fish, but we also believe 
that the vulnerable among us who need help right now, should 
be helped right now.
2.25 Enhancement of the scheme on exemptions /
reductions related to vehicles for persons with
disability 
In this Budget we are proposing amendments to two categories 
of the scheme involving exemptions or deductions related to 
vehicles used by persons with disability, so that more persons 
with special needs become eligible. Further details about these 
amendments are set out in Table 2.1.
2.26 Scheme for persons with disability who need
occupational therapy 
Over 1,300 children with disability, from birth to 5 years of age, 
who require a clinical occupational therapy service, will benefit 
from this scheme. This will lead to a reduction in the waiting 
list of children awaiting their turn for an occupational therapy 
service. Every family who falls in this category will receive a 
number of vouchers to be used for occupational therapy services 
in the private sector. In this way we would be meeting the early 
intervention aim for children with disability. 
19
2.27 Investment for more schools to have Autism Units
and Braille machines 
We will keep investing to increase the number of schools with 
Autism Units. We will also invest in Braille machines to enhance 
multisensory learning and explore how to raise awareness about 
learning sign language, even among the students and educators 
themselves. 
2.28 Investment to continue helping children with
disability beyond their post-secondary education 
We will be working so that, over a number of years, the services 
currently provided to these students while attending compulsory 
education, will continue to be provided to those who decide to 
further their studies beyond post-secondary education.
2.29 Community Hub service for persons with disability 
A Community Hub service will be introduced in the Northern 
part of Malta, where persons with disability would be able to 
undergo specialised training on various aspects related to 
independent living.
2.30 Extension of psychologist services for persons with
disability and their relatives 
Apart from this, we are kicking off an extension of the psychologist 
services for persons with disability and their relatives to continue 
facilitating timely assistance with the least possible delay.
20
2.31 Purchase of ‘drive from wheelchair’ vehicle including
specialised training for a number of driving instructors 
A “drive from wheelchair” vehicle will be purchased to enable 
persons with disability to access driving lessons and thus keep 
improving their level of independence. Specialised training will 
also be delivered to several driving instructors so that these 
would be able to provide instruction to persons with disability.
2.32 Continuation of the INK project 
In 2022, we will keep building on the work started by the 
INK project, which was partly financed from the European 
Social Fund, to keep providing training and work experience 
opportunities with pay for persons with disability.
2.33 Further investment in St Vincent de Paul Residence 
A specialised CT scan facility will be installed within the Rużar 
Briffa Complex at the St Vincent de Paul Long Term Care 
Facility, as part of the Day Hospital project. This is by way of 
a continuation of the project that was launched in September 
consisting of the provision of an X-Ray machine within the same 
complex. Such interdisciplinary geriatric services will be open 
to elderly persons living at the same residence, as well as to 
older persons in the community. Another measure is the setting 
up of a garden for persons with dementia at the St Vincent de 
Paul Residence. This garden will be designed in such a way as 
to address the specific needs of persons at different stages of 
this condition.
21
2.34 Housing 
2.34.1 “Nikru biex Nassistu” scheme
The Housing Authority’s waiting list for alternative accommodation 
has gone down to under 1,800 persons, while the rate of new 
applications has halved.
This is the result of the allocation of around 700 apartments for 
social accommodation, out of existing stock as well as through 
schemes, such as the “Nikru biex Nassistu” scheme, whereby 
apartments are being rented from the private sector. 
Over the coming year, this initiative is expected to reach about 
680 families to whom housing will be allocated as a result of 
the “Nikru biex Nassistu” scheme.
2.34.2 Intergenerational housing project 
The project for regeneration of dilapidated property, which forms 
part of the programme introduced earlier in this legislature, is 
bearing fruit. Indeed, to date there are over 30 apartments being 
used by the Government for social purposes.
Furthermore, the programme for regeneration, improvement 
and embellishment of existing social accommodation blocks has 
continued.  Extensive work has been undertaken on facades and 
common areas, and this has continued to improve the residents’ 
standard of living. This is coupled with repairs and maintenance 
carried out in private homes, which over this year added up to 125 
interventions, and works aimed at making homes safer and more 
22
accessible for persons with disability or with mobility challenges, 
accounting for 123 interventions during the current year.
Over and above this, the first intergenerational housing 
programme in Malta will commence operations in 2022. This will 
accommodate about 80 residents – elderly and young persons 
– and is being located in a building which has been given a new 
lease of life as part of this programme.
2.34.3 Introduction of the Care Plan project
The programme for the construction of 500 apartments, 
financed through funds from the European Investment Bank 
and the Council of Europe Development Bank, is now in its final 
phase. Meanwhile, work is proceeding swiftly on the construction 
of almost 700 apartments, with the investment being partly 
sourced from the National Development and Social Fund (NDSF).
This year the Housing Development Fund has launched a study 
about the introduction of Care Plan, a semi-specific programme 
aimed at addressing the particular needs that cause people to 
resort to social housing. In this way we would be able to continue 
addressing such specific needs, while fighting dependence and 
promoting social mobility.
We plan that, over a number of years, this Care Plan would 
be extended to all applicants and beneficiaries of social 
accommodation.
23
2.34.4 Extension of the Equity Sharing Plus scheme 
The Housing Authority has been instrumental in increasing 
access to the property market for low- and medium-income 
groups. The number of beneficiaries of the Equity Sharing 
scheme, which is open to people aged 40 and over and where 
the Government takes up to a maximum of 50% of the property 
value, has continued to increase.
This scheme is now being extended and made available to 
persons aged 30 and over, in order to improve this group’s access 
to the property market and enable them to own their homes. 
As a result, what is currently the case for eligible persons aged 
40 plus will now apply also to people aged 30 and over, with 
Government taking up a maximum of 50% of the property value 
along with the buyer.
In the meantime, other schemes that help young people become 
the owners of their homes, such as the scheme relating to the 
10% deposit on the signing of a promise of sale, which has had 
over 200 beneficiaries to date, will remain open.
Similarly, the Home Assist scheme will remain in force to help 
low-income persons and couples to secure bank loans.
In order to offer more possibilities and different alternatives 
for couples to buy their own property, we will be exploring the 
possibility of creating a fund offering favourable rates and easier 
payment terms for low-income couples.
24
2.34.5 Investment in the Foundation for Affordable
Accommodation 
The Government has entered into an agreement with the 
Archdiocese of Malta for the two entities to establish the 
Foundation for Affordable Accommodation. This foundation 
will draw up programmes for affordable accommodation and 
ensure a permanent supply of adequate housing that is within the 
reach of people in different income categories. The main target 
category of this foundation will consist of people whose income 
falls outside the eligibility criteria for social accommodation 
but is not high enough to enable them to access the property 
market without support. 
In agreement with the Archdiocese of Malta, the Government 
will be contributing the sum of €300,000 per year to cover the 
administration and operational costs of this foundation.
2.34.6 Reduction of tax on the sale and purchase of property
previously rented out at affordable rates 
The Government will reduce by half the tax rate payable in 
respect of the first €200,000 on the sale and purchase of 
property previously rented out, for at least ten years, to tenants 
eligible for the Rent Benefit at affordable rates as issued by the 
Housing Authority. If the property is sold to the tenant, no tax 
will be payable on the sale and purchase of the property.
If the property has been rented out for less than ten years but 
more than three years, at affordable rates and for use as the 
tenants’ primary residence, the tax on the sale and purchase of 
the property will be reduced by half.
25
2.34.7 Subsidy on structural adaptation works 
The Housing Authority’s intervention in the market in its 
regulatory capacity is leaving a positive impact. In fact, since 
the coming into force of the private rental market regulations in 
2020, more than 40,000 contracts have been registered, with 
hundreds of disputes being resolved within a set number of days 
in accordance with the law by the Rent Dispute Resolution Panel 
within the Housing Authority.
With regard to controlled leases, the value of the property 
eligible for a subsidy for structural adaptations of dangerous 
structures in houses leased before 1 June 1995 will be increased 
to €250,000. Thus, a subsidy of up to €25,000 will be granted, 
and at the same time more beneficiaries will become eligible. 
2.34.8 New Hope guarantee 
By virtue of a back-to-back €3 million guarantee from the 
National Development and Social Fund (NDSF), the Housing 
Authority is offering an alternative to a life insurance policy for 
persons who, due to past medical conditions or a disability they 
live with, could not obtain such a policy and were thus unable 
to become homeowners.
26
Table 2.1: Amendments to the Scheme on Exemptions/
Reductions related to Motor Vehicles for Persons
with Special Needs
Vehicle of a person whose disability 
precludes him/her from driving
Vehicles of the parents (carers) of 
the person with special needs, or 
first-degree family members or the 
spouse of the person with special 
needs
Standard vehicles
Exemption from payment 
/ reduction in the vehicle’s 
annual circulation licence 
fee
Note
Standard vehicles with 
modifications
Exemption/reduction in 
registration tax
€850
Exemption/reduction in 
import duty
€1,700
Exemption/reduction in 
value added tax
€1,700
Exemption from payment 
/ reduction in the vehicle’s 
annual circulation licence 
fee
Note
Automatic vehicles
Exemption/reduction in 
registration tax
€1,200
Automatic vehicles with 
modifications
Exemption/reduction in 
registration tax
€1,200
Exemption/reduction in 
registration tax
€1,200
Exemption/reduction in 
import duty
€2,400
Exemption/reduction in 
import duty
€2,400
Exemption/reduction in 
value added tax
€2,400
Exemption/reduction in 
value added tax
€2,400
Exemption from payment 
/ reduction in the vehicle’s 
annual circulation licence 
fee
Note
Note
Standard vehicles and automatic vehicles registered after 1 January 2009: no annual circulation tax is 
payable for the first five years from the year of manufacture, and as from the sixth year, 50% of the 
annual circulation tax applies. These fees are applicable for petrol-engine vehicles with CO2 emissions 
up to 180g/km, and for diesel-engine vehicles with CO2 emissions up to 150g/km. The annual 
circulation tax is payable in full if the vehicle’s emissions exceed the mentioned levels.
Standard vehicles with modifications and automatic vehicles with modifications: no annual circulation 
tax is payable for the first five years from the date of registration, and as from the sixth year, 50% 
of the annual circulation tax applies. These fees are applicable for petrol-engine vehicles with CO2 
emissions up to 180g/km, and for diesel-engine vehicles with CO2 emissions up to 150g/km. The 
annual circulation tax is payable in full if the vehicle’s emissions exceed the mentioned levels.
27
3. A Hardworking Malta 
Mr Speaker,
If there is one area in which this Government has established 
credibility over the past eight years, it is in ensuring that Malta 
registers steady economic growth in order to create wealth. The 
money needed to bring about greater social mobility, reduce 
poverty and invest in the social and health sectors, does not grow 
on trees. Money is forthcoming when the economy prospers.
However, today we are being told that, while it’s good to create 
work and wealth, we also need to ensure that our country 
remains a pleasant place to live in. This is because the strong 
economic growth registered in recent years has brought about 
new challenges that are altogether different from those we had 
in 2013. For this reason, economic growth must not be the sole 
indicator, and money must not be the sole measure of success. 
Greater emphasis needs to be placed on economic development.
Here I would like to explain the difference between economic 
growth and economic development, so that we can all clearly 
understand the vision that underpins this Budget. Economic 
growth measures the increase in the production of goods and 
services in the economy. Thus, economic growth is an indicator 
that measures the increase in national income, meaning that as 
an indicator it is more quantitative than qualitative. The economic 
development indicator does not measure just the national 
income, but also qualitative aspects including improvements in 
the quality of life, by considering among others, factors such as 
the rate of early school leaving and life expectancy.
28
In this context, this Budget is intended to improve economic 
development combined with environmental sustainability.
3.1 Investment in human capital 
The economic development of a country requires the Government 
to invest in the resources that produce goods and services. The 
factors of production are made up of four categories that include 
land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship. These factors make 
up the foundation of the economy.
When we speak about capital, we must make a distinction 
between physical capital, that is the investment in the country’s 
infrastructure, and human capital, which represents the skills, 
education levels and the training of the people in the job market. 
When a country invests in labour, it would be investing in the 
quantity of this resource, meaning it would be seeking to reduce 
the unemployment rate and create more jobs. But investment 
in human capital goes beyond this, because it is an investment 
in workers’ skills, knowledge and experience.
Over the years, this Government has invested in the worker and 
as a result, we are registering among the highest employment 
rates and the lowest unemployment rates in our history, and also 
in comparison with other European countries.
But now is the time to focus on our investment in human capital.
Advanced countries are in a race against time to calibrate their 
economies to the new sectors of technology and the green 
29
economy. Technology and the green economy are the future. 
We must accept this reality so we can be prepared for it. What 
is more, if we invest early in these areas, we will become more 
competitive and more dynamic than other countries. However, 
to succeed in these areas we must first and foremost invest in 
the skills of our workers.
You can be the richest country in the world, but if your people 
do not have the skills of tomorrow, everything will be lost. Our 
country does not have oil, gas or mineral resources. We have 
come this far because of the ability and hard work of the Maltese 
and Gozitan worker.
3.1.1 The National Employment Policy 
A few days ago we launched the new National Employment 
Policy through which we are starting to confront this challenge.
This policy comprises a plan for raising the value of the Maltese/
Gozitan worker’s hour of work. This will be done by enhancing 
skills, offering training opportunities, incentivising employers 
and also employees themselves to improve their skills.
Mr Speaker, I am tabling a copy of the document in question.
3.1.2 Workforce Skills Census 
To obtain a clear and wide view of the skills of our country’s 
workforce, early next year we will undertake a national workforce 
skills census. This census will be the first of its kind, not only in 
Malta but also in Europe, with a total investment of €2 million.
30
To enable future updates to this census, we will ensure that this 
process is carried out digitally.
Subsequently our task as a Government will be to ensure that 
such demand for work is fulfilled with Maltese and Gozitan 
workers trained for the purpose.
Once this exercise is concluded, we will start undertaking a 
digitalisation audit of workplaces to ensure we are well-prepared 
for this new challenge. 
3.1.3 Training fund 
In the National Employment Policy we recognised the importance 
of training and the industry’s desperate call for more skills, 
especially those of a technical and specialised nature.
For this reason, we will be launching a training fund with an initial 
amount of €2 million, although I do not rule out increasing this 
amount if the need arises, so that industry itself would be able 
to train employees through programmes designed by itself. I will 
be meeting with social partners so that we execute this measure 
together and ensure its success.
3.1.4 In-Work benefit for employees with atypical working hours 
As from next year, we will be granting an in-work benefit of 
€150 per year to those employees whose basic pay does not 
exceed €20,000 and who work atypical hours, that is, in the 
evening, on weekends and shifts, within the private sector in the 
following sectors: accommodation and food service activities, 
administrative and support service activities, manufacturing, 
31
transportation and storage, and wholesale and retail trade. To be 
eligible workers must have worked in these sectors for at least 
6 months over a calendar year. In total, this will assist around 
40,000 workers, with the benefit being equivalent to about 10% 
of the income tax they pay.
We will thus be giving these employees €6 million.
3.1.5 Further reductions in the income tax rate 
This year we have reduced the tax rate on overtime income, to 
the effect that for employees whose basic annual pay does not 
exceed €20,000 and who are not in a managerial position, the 
first 100 overtime hours in a year are now being taxed at 15%.
In order to further reduce the income tax rate, next year 
employees whose basic annual pay does not exceed €20,000 
and who are not in a managerial position will be taxed at 15% 
on the first €10,000 overtime income.
Through this measure we will be handing out €6 million 
to employees by way of tax reductions. More than 30,000 
employees will benefit from this measure.
3.1.6 Adjustment to the tax exemption for pensioners 
To encourage pensioners to remain active and continue working 
beyond retirement age, over a period of five years starting from 
the coming year, pension income will gradually no longer be 
considered as part of the taxable income.
32
This means that about 8,500 pensioners who earn additional 
income on top of their pension will benefit from a substantial 
reduction in their tax bill, whereas another 8,200 pensioners 
earning income other than their pension will no longer be liable 
to tax. This measure comes at a total cost of €27 million.
3.1.7 Reduction of the part-time tax rate from 15% to 10% 
In fulfilling another electoral promise, this Government will 
continue rewarding hard work. We will be reducing the income 
tax rate for part-timers from 15% to 10%.
Mr Speaker, many people have been calling for this measure for 
a long time, and this Government delivers on its promises.
As a result, with this measure we will be giving €5 million in 
income tax cuts for 23,000 employees.
3.1.8 Enhancement of the In-Work Benefit Scheme 
One of the measures that have helped to incentivise work and 
raise families’ income levels has certainly been the In-Work 
Benefit introduced by this Government in 2015. This benefit is 
paid to working parents with children under 23 years of age.
This is yet another Budget where we will be improving the In-
Work Benefit. We are doing this by extending its applicability 
limits and increasing the rates payable to all beneficiaries.
•	
For couples in gainful employment, the annual income limit 
is being increased from €35,000 to €50,000; 
33
•	
For couples of whom only one parent is in gainful employment, 
the annual income limit is being increased from €26,000 to 
€35,000;
•	
For single parents in gainful employment, the annual income 
limit is being increased from €23,000 to €35,000.
The new minimum rates for around 7,000 families who will 
benefit from the widening of the scheme’s applicability limits will 
amount to €200 per annum. Moreover, we will also be increasing 
all the existing rates by €100 per year for each child.
Thus, we will be handing out €2 million in additional income for 
these families.
3.1.9 Increase in Tax Refund 
I am also pleased to announce that the Tax Refund afforded in 
recent years by this Government will not only be given out again 
in the coming year, but it will be increased once more.
This is not a refund of overpaid tax, but a payment intended to 
reward hard work.
The value of the cheque will now be going up to between €60 
and €140 (see Table 3.1) with the highest refund being given to 
the lowest income earners.
This measure will benefit over 250,000 people at a total 
expenditure of €24 million.
34
Other countries are increasing taxes, like our predecessors did. 
By contrast Mr Speaker, we will continue giving to the people 
because this is a Government for the people.
3.1.10 Employees of contractors providing services to the public
sector 
During the consultation process, we became aware that 
contractor employees and public sector employees are not paid 
equally for the same work. Consequently, the Government will 
pay employees of contractors providing work to the public sector 
at a double rate for hours worked on Sundays. This expense is 
costed at €5 million.
3.1.11 Extension of free childcare service 
One of the challenges being faced by businesses today is a 
shortage of employees across a number of sectors, caused by 
the impact of the pandemic as well as workers’ lack of mobility. 
This is a challenge that is being faced by other countries as well, 
and one that we, as a Government, are committed to address.
One of the reasons behind the lack of Maltese and Gozitan 
workers in such sectors is that the respective hours of work 
would be in the evenings, at weekends, or organised in shifts.
In view of this, we are extending the free childcare service for 
the benefit of employees who work such hours.
35
3.1.12 Parental leave
The Government will commence talks at MCESD level with 
the aim that next year our country would be in a position to 
implement the European Union directive on parental leave and 
work-life balance.
3.1.13 The minimum wage
One of the most common issues flagged by low-income workers 
is that the minimum wage is not sufficient. In the European Union 
context, Malta’s minimum wage is not among the lowest, but I 
understand that, to have a good standard of living and increase 
social mobility, this must increase.
The minimum wage should be increased in a context where 
businesses retain their competitiveness, and this could be done 
if, while the minimum wage rises on the one hand, on the other 
hand we see how this can be balanced out through a reduction 
in companies’ income tax.
Along these lines, over the coming year the Government will 
continue working with the MCESD and stakeholders in these 
fields with the aim of finding a common position for the country 
to the benefit of both employees and businesses.
3.1.14 Minimum legal requirements for employment contracts 
To protect vulnerable employees, we will be launching an online 
portal which will include a number of employment contract 
templates. These contracts will include the minimum requisites 
and standards as stipulated by law, to ensure that all employees’ 
due rights are respected.
36
3.2 Cost of living 
3.2.1 Cost of Living Adjustment
The Cost of Living Adjustment for the coming year will be of 
€1.75 per week. This adjustment is calculated in accordance with 
a formula established by agreement of all the social partners 
within the MCESD. It is granted to all employees, pensioners 
as well as persons on social benefits. Students’ stipends will 
increase on a pro-rata basis.
3.2.2 Cost of living mechanism for vulnerable families 
The cost of living is a reality that this Government is not afraid 
to discuss. On the contrary, we are ready to explore how to 
address this issue, so that, above all, we protect the families that 
are most vulnerable to inflation. I consider this challenge as a 
priority, and for this purpose, over the coming days we will be 
meeting the relevant stakeholders to initiate discussions about 
a new mechanism that works independently of COLA, to be 
applied in circumstances including sudden increases in inflation. 
This burden will be shouldered by the Government as we believe 
that, while we should always encourage social mobility, there is 
a category of people who are presently in need of help.
37
Table 3.1: Increase in Tax Refund
Computation: Single
Income
Amount
2021
2022
€0 - €15,000
€80
€125
€15,001 - €30,000
€65
€95
€30,001 - €59,999
€45
€60
Computation: Married
Income
Amount
2021
2022
€0 - €20,000
€95
€140
€20,001 - €40,000
€80
€110
€40,001 - €59,999
€50
€65
Computation: Parent
Income
Amount
2021
2022
€0 - €15,000
€90
€135
€15,001 - €30,000
€75
€105
€30,001 - €59,999
€45
€60
38
4. An Ambitious Malta 
We can never accept a reality where children, having spent 
thirteen years in compulsory education, exit the education 
system without the necessary skills for the modern world.
Malta was one of the few countries where students lost only a 
few days in school closures during the last scholastic year. This 
was the result of the investment of over €30 million in this regard.
Here it would be amiss not to thank all educators and all those 
who worked to ensure that our children could carry on with 
their studies.
4.1 All students’ stipends to increase by 10% 
Mr Speaker, when this Government says that it wants to keep 
investing in our students’ skills to truly help them reach their 
potential, it does so in actual fact.
Accordingly, we are increasing the stipend of all students by 10%.
4.2 Stipend granted to students even if they work up to
a maximum of 25 hours weekly 
In addition, students will continue receiving the stipend even if 
they work for up to 25 hours per week.
Through these two measures we will be giving students a total 
increase of €5 million.
39
4.3 Further investment in Apprenticeship 
Apprenticeship is important because it represents a concrete 
link between the educational and employment worlds. 
Investment will be undertaken to increase the number of students 
in apprenticeship placements within the private sector. There will 
be investment to better equip these students with laboratories 
and facilities where they could undergo training in technology 
and other skills as required by the relative economic sectors.
4.4 Strengthening the status of the educational profession 
Throughout the coming year we will enact the new law for 
the regulation and further strengthening of the status of the 
educational profession. This should lead to a more professional 
status being afforded to all educators, including KGEs and LSEs, 
regardless of the educational level they work in.
Together with the University of Malta, MCAST and the Institute 
for Education, we will oversee the continuation of the mentoring 
programme that is offered to newly qualified teachers, as well 
as the introduction of more courses so that all educators would 
be able to pursue continued professional education throughout 
their career.
4.5 SEC exams to be held in students’ own schools 
Following this year’s pilot project, in the coming scholastic year 
there will be more schools where students would sit for their 
SEC exams at the same school where they attend, thereby taking 
40
the edge off their stress level as they would be examined in a 
familiar setting.
This will be done through an investment of €1 million, and will help 
many children suffering from certain conditions, allowing them 
to sit for their exams in an environment they are accustomed to.
4.6 Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) learning 
When it comes to the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics, this Government will continue improving the 
available facilities to offer the highest possible level of learning. 
Accordingly, we are launching a programme of modernisation 
and investing in modern equipment for 180 science laboratories 
within our schools.
In addition, we will continue to upgrade the digital network 
infrastructure in state schools, enabling the use of the latest 
existing technology in this field.
4.7 Schools’ modernisation and extension programme
The time has come to renovate the schools located in the heart 
of our towns and villages.
We will invest in upgrading the infrastructure, for example the 
electricity supply, enabling us to invest in improvements such 
as better air conditioning for our schools. 
41
Construction works are set to proceed on the new schools in 
Msida and Rabat Gozo, while modernisation projects will be 
undertaken in Qormi, Mellieħa, Għaxaq, as well as in several 
other schools in Gozo.
4.8 Research and innovation programmes 
We will be boosting funding for various programmes run by the 
Malta Council for Science and Technology. We are launching a 
new programme called Go to Market, with the aim of optimising 
advanced technology to the highest level so it could then be 
commercialised on a local and international scale.
Through the Horizon Support Measures scheme, we will 
encourage and facilitate the participation of Maltese researchers 
and entities in tapping this programme’s funds. Horizon Europe 
provides excellent opportunities for Maltese researchers to 
collaborate with high-profile European and international 
researchers and companies. Furthermore, participation in 
Horizon Europe raises the profile of research in Malta.
4.9 Investment in physical capital 
Through the COVID Wage Supplement measure, we have 
safeguarded around 100,000 jobs as well as over 16,000 
companies, businesses and self-employed persons.
Likewise, throughout the recovery phase we will ensure that 
businesses are not left to fend on their own, and we will be 
creating a new set of incentives for this purpose.
42
4.9.1 Measures to mitigate price hikes in the cost of international
transport 
Since we are aware that several businesses are increasing their 
stock of imported products, we will be extending the rent subsidy 
incentive to reach a larger number of eligible businesses. This 
will immediately start to mitigate the cost that several Maltese 
importers and businesses are currently shouldering following 
the surge in international transport prices.
4.9.2 Investment incentives for enterprises 
Numerous groups of companies involved in different industries 
and enterprises have had to support businesses that were 
impacted by COVID-19 through income from other operations as 
well as through reserves created by their hard work in the past. 
These same entities had already invested extensively in these 
sectors in preceding years, with the intention of creating more 
employment and prosperity.
We are introducing a temporary scheme to assist such groups 
of companies in their recovery. The scheme will enable them to 
derive the benefit of capital allowances on investments made in 
enterprises impacted by the pandemic, allowing them to be used 
against tax dues on the income of the companies that remained 
sustainable. This means that such groups will be able to benefit 
from the capital allowances in advance. Thus, their current tax 
bills will be lowered, resulting in the availability of more funds 
to be reinvested in the economy.
Therefore, groups of companies having unabsorbed or unutilised 
capital allowances in 2020 and 2021 due to losses sustained 
43
during the pandemic will be able to apply for the relative tax 
deduction benefit against any taxable income derived by other 
companies forming part of the same group, for basis year 2021 
(Year of Assessment 2022).
As from next year, Malta Enterprise will also be introducing a 
scheme through which a tax benefit will be given to businesses 
if they reinvest a percentage of their retained profits in eligible 
projects in the same business and/or in another business, as 
long as the investment is made within two years starting on 1 
January 2022. This assistance will be compliant with business 
assistance parameters.
We will also introduce fiscal incentives to keep supporting 
businesses to make more innovative, ecological and digital 
investments, as well as to invest in the social field.
4.9.3 More enterprise-friendly schemes 
Through schemes such as Change to Grow and Smart & 
Sustainable Investment, we are now also providing financial 
assistance to spur the transformation towards more sustainable 
and digital operations. At the same time, enterprises experiencing 
severe losses are being supported by the ReStart scheme.
Through various schemes, we are helping businesses to 
keep diversifying their operations, and providing continuous 
assistance to start-ups.
 
44
4.9.4 Reform in the system for remission of interest and
penalties 
Our achievements in the social, educational and medical fields 
can only be sustained if each and every one contributes his/
her share through tax payments. Consequently, we feel that we 
need to give a clear and firm message to the effect that, while 
we will be helping those who genuinely encounter economic 
and fiscal difficulties, we shall not tolerate unjustified faltering 
on tax payments.
In view of this, I wish to announce that the system for remission 
of interest on tax balances will be considered only in strict 
reference to the proviso to regulation 2 of Legal Notice 361 of 
2013 (SL 372.26). Therefore, it will not be the norm for everyone 
to benefit from interest remission.
With effect from 1 June 2022, the interest rate on income tax 
and VAT balances will be 7.2% per annum.
The Government believes that whatever is necessary must be 
done to uphold fiscal morality in our country.
4.9.5 Industrial infrastructure 
Industrial zones are a priority for our country, and we will ensure 
that no less than €470 million are invested in their modernisation. 
This investment by INDIS will create new industrial spaces 
without using ODZ land. New investment, originated both locally 
and from other countries, necessitates this upgrade with the 
ultimate aim of securing better jobs for our workers. 
45
The Life Sciences Park; Kordin Business Incubation Centre 
(KBIC); Ħal Far, Bulebel, Marsa, Kordin, San Ġwann and Luqa 
will be among the locations which will benefit from a portion of 
this significant investment.
We are also assisting aviation maintenance companies in their 
infrastructural needs, which together with a car park in the Park 
4 zone of the Ħal Farruġ airport, will make these facilities more 
accessible for these companies’ employees and clients.
4.9.6 Road infrastructure 
This Government will continue improving the infrastructure of 
the Maltese islands to enable our country to sustain its economic 
development.
To this end, the Government will continue with its road 
investment programme, covering both urban and rural roads. 
Since 2019, some 709 residential and rural roads have already 
been completed.
Current works on arterial roads, which are also part of the Ten-T 
network, will continue. Thus, several projects will be completed 
by the end of this year including the Central Link entailing an 
investment of around €55 million.
During 2022, we plan to proceed with the works on the 
Kirkop Tunnels and the Airport Intersection Project (KTAIP) 
and the Mrieħel Bypass, among other infrastructural projects. 
To complement such projects, their surroundings are being 
embellished through the planting of mature trees and other 
46
plants. In fact, more than 32,000 trees and over 20,000 shrubs 
have already been planted in the areas surrounding infrastructural 
projects of this kind.
With regards to arterial and residential road construction 
projects in Gozo, around 34,000 square metres of new roads 
have been completed up to September 2021. In 2022, works will 
proceed on several arterial and residential roads. Restoration 
works will also commence on the aqueduct remains located in 
the limits of Rabat. In full collaboration with the Local Councils, 
the regeneration project of the main square in Munxar and Ta’ 
Sannat will be carried out.
4.9.7 Maritime infrastructure 
Investment will be made to improve infrastructure such as that 
of the Grand Harbour, to be able to utilise all parts of the port 
and create new spaces for berthing of vessels, be they carrying 
cargo or tourists. All this will be done in the context of the Grand 
Harbour regeneration plan launched this year.
4.9.8 Exclusive Economic Zone 
In recent months our country has kicked off the legislative 
process for a new concept aimed at deriving the full potential 
of our country’s seas. With the introduction of the Exclusive 
Economic Zone we will start exploring opportunities for the 
use of our sea space, such as for renewable energy generation 
among others.
47
4.10 European funds 
The Government has secured the largest European fund 
allocation for Malta and Gozo in terms of the new European 
Funds Programme 2021-2027. The allocation exceeds by far 
the €2 billion mark, with a funding amount reaching the sum of 
€2.27 billion.
Malta will also benefit from nearly €320 million in EU financing 
out of the Recovery and Resilience Facility. In July 2021, Malta 
submitted its plan for utilisation of these funds to the European 
Commission. Malta’s Recovery and Resilience Plan presents a 
mix of structural reforms and investments aimed at supporting 
recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well 
as accelerating the transition towards a more digital and green 
economy and society.
4.11 Strategic plan for Malta’s financial services sector 
In January of this year, the Government set up the MFSAC (Malta 
Financial Services Advisory Council) which has, as one of its 
key aims, the drawing up of a long-term strategic plan for the 
industry.
The strategy itself is centred around three key elements. The first 
is to protect the industry from the current turmoil. The second 
is to consolidate and strengthen the key structures and systems. 
The third is to encourage the industry to attract more innovative 
operators and industries, while at the local level offering Maltese 
people innovative but secure services.
48
The fundamental initiatives delivering this strategy include 
simplification of the Regulatory Process and Institutional 
Architecture, in-depth structuring of the National Payment 
Infrastructure, Consolidation of Identity Management, 
establishment of a committee for the Reform of Financial 
Services Legislation, Modernisation of the Maltese Tax Structure, 
and Encouragement of Talent in Financial Services. All these are 
being implemented with the aim of leaving a positive, efficient 
and credible impression on the users of such services.
4.12 Identity Malta
The single permit electronic platform has now been upgraded, 
and work is being carried out on the extension of the electronic 
platform for third country and European citizens. It is now time 
for the Agency to continue investing in the provision of more 
online services.
Looking at 2022, the Research Section is working on investment 
in a new electronic system through which notaries will be able 
to register notes digitally using a qualified electronic signature.
Identity Malta will keep delivering and strengthening the eID 
service with the aim of championing the digital transformation 
strategy while reducing paper use.
4.13 Investment in new niches 
In collaboration with Maltese educational institutions, we will be 
investing €0.5 million for the design of training for tertiary level 
49
students to obtain industry-recognised certification in emerging 
technologies.
There are many opportunities for our young people in new 
economic niches such as the development of digital games, 
video games and e-sports. In this respect, investment to attract 
this industry will be made in education, promotion, incentives 
and the setting up of an incubator.
4.14 Launch of a Seed Fund 
In collaboration with Malta Enterprise and the University of 
Malta, a Seed Fund will be launched with the aim of encouraging 
researchers and entrepreneurs to obtain financial support and 
develop their innovative and sustainable ideas.
4.15 Start-Up Residence Permit
Through the proposal for a Start-Up Residence Permit mechanism, 
Malta can attract more start-ups and entrepreneurs. Apart from 
the schemes already offered by Malta Enterprise, the need is felt 
to establish a reference point which could better understand 
these entrepreneurs’ needs, and for a Start-up Visa to be offered. 
This Visa would make the Malta package more attractive, offering 
flexibility for such start-ups to establish themselves in Malta in 
a way that pays off, both for their commercial activity as well 
as for our country.
Malta Enterprise will be working together with the Malta 
Residency Agency to set up a programme for non-EU nationals 
seeking a base that offers them a good package of grants, 
50
benefits and opportunities. Persons who qualify according to 
a set of conditions/criteria would be eligible to apply for this 
permit, relocate to our country and contribute to the Maltese 
economy.
 
4.16 Extension of the MDB SME Tailored Facility to include
green and sustainable projects 
In our drive to keep incentivising private sector investment in 
green projects that propel a more sustainable economy, we will 
be extending eligibility for the SME Tailored Facility issued by 
the Malta Development Bank, to include financing for sustainable 
and environmental projects undertaken by the private sector.
This measure will particularly address small and medium-sized 
enterprises seeking to diversify their operations and business 
through green and environment-friendly projects. This is because 
such businesses would be able to benefit from loans at attractive 
rates up to a maximum of €5 million. Through this measure we 
will be facilitating, in a tangible way, direct investment by the 
private sector in projects that drive sustainable economic growth 
and above all create green jobs for Gozitan and Maltese workers.
4.17 Establishment of Blue Med Hub 
Malta Enterprise will set up the Blue Med Hub bringing together 
various experts in this field with the aim of attracting start-ups 
and small and medium-sized enterprises, both local and foreign. 
The Hub will collaborate with African and Middle Eastern entities 
to open up investment opportunities in this sector.
51
4.18 Concession for the transfer of family businesses 
As we have done in the past years, we want to continue assisting 
family businesses to move forward while planning better for 
the future of the business. Consequently, we are once again 
extending the concession on a reduction in stamp duty from 
5% to 1.5% when family businesses are transferred inter vivos to 
their children or younger generations.
4.19 Social enterprises 
Since we believe in the contribution of social enterprises to the 
Maltese economy, we are in the final stages of passing legislation 
to strengthen this sector, which strives for a better quality of 
life, social inclusion, sustainability and environment protection.
4.20 Investing in Tourism 
During the pandemic it was sad to see places such as Valletta 
without any tourists, and silence reigning in areas which were 
once full of life. It was a tough year for all those working in 
the tourism sector, but they always had the full support of this 
Government with a spend of almost €800 million in assistance 
for the sector.
Mr Speaker, I am proud to say that, thanks to this assistance, the 
collapse that many people were anticipating did not happen. 
Rather, our restaurants are full, hotels have experienced a good 
summer, and the tourism sector is gradually recovering.
52
The future of this sector hinges on the extent to which our 
country can continue to excel in relation to COVID-19 and be a 
safe destination for tourists.
The most important driver of tourism recovery remains the 
introduction of new air routes. Over the past months, negotiations 
were ongoing to encourage airlines to open up again and add 
more routes.
 
We have seen the national airline, Air Malta, consolidating its 
route network and increasing the number of operational aircraft 
in the routes that make most sense. Meanwhile, discussions with 
the European Commission regarding the company’s future are 
still underway.
4.20.1 Connectivity for Gozo 
To continue enhancing connectivity between the islands of Malta 
and Gozo, the heliport facilities in Xewkija will be modernised.
This will complement the significant improvements to Gozo’s 
connectivity with Malta and beyond, both in physical terms, with 
the fourth ferry operating across the channel and the operation 
of the fast ferry service, as well as digital connectivity following 
completion of the second fibre optic cable between Malta and 
Gozo.
4.20.2 Development of the Tourism Product and Regeneration
of Tourism Zones 
Besides striving to stimulate tourist demand, we also need to 
keep working to strengthen our offering by investing in our 
53
tourism product. The more robust, attractive and innovative our 
tourism product is, the more successfully we can compete to 
attract a stronger economic return.
In this context, we have just set up a new Agency for the 
Regeneration of Tourism Zones. This entity will focus on planning 
and delivering major regeneration projects in coastal tourism 
zones, as well as managing such zones.
The Agency for the Regeneration of Tourism Zones will be 
working on several projects, including the Holistic Plan for the 
Regeneration of the Northern Region of Malta, which includes St 
Paul’s Bay, Buġibba, Qawra and Xemxija. Such a project warrants 
studies and consultations and thus, a committee bringing 
together wide experience and locality involvement has been 
nominated to identify the necessary studies before drawing up 
the proposals for Buġibba’s regeneration plan.
4.21 The Film Industry 
Since the onset of the pandemic, our country has managed to 
attract 28 international productions, which have injected over 
€91 million into our country’s economy, and has continued 
to create more jobs. This is going to be a record year for our 
country’s film industry.
In 2022, we will keep working on the masterplan for the Malta 
Film Studios, where work is set to commence on the construction 
of the first soundstage in Malta. The main objective is to create 
careers in a sustainable industry. During 2022, our country will 
54
continue to attract blockbusters which will keep marking Malta’s 
position on the global map.
In recognition of the local film and television industry, we will be 
organising the Malta Film Awards for the first time this January, 
where we will reward the talent and successes of all those who 
form part of Malta’s film and television industry.
Through the investment being made by the Government in this 
area, we need to ensure that the industry is a high quality one 
that fosters good careers.
4.22 Economic forecasts 
Mr Speaker,
As a result of the package of measures I have just announced, 
our country is expected to recover at a fast pace from the 
negative impact of the pandemic. Indeed, for the coming year 
we are forecasting a growth rate of 6.5% in real terms, and 8.6% 
in nominal terms. In the years 2023 and 2024, economic growth 
is forecast at 4.7% and 4.5% respectively.
Economic Growth for the coming year is expected to be driven 
by domestic demand, especially private consumption which 
is anticipated to grow by 4.0%. The Government’s capital 
investment together with large private sector capital projects 
will sustain investment growth, which is expected to increase 
by 8.8% in total. As international demand is picking up, exports 
are also projected to contribute to the growth rate with a 6.6% 
increase spurred by the recovery of the tourism sector, the 
55
sustained growth in the digital and commercial services sectors, 
as well as the strengthening of the manufacturing sector.
These growth forecasts translate into an expected increase of 
2.2% in employment next year, while the unemployment level 
is projected to remain relatively low at a rate of 4.0%. These 
figures are consistent with an increase in the value of employee 
productivity, which is essential to sustain wage increases but 
also to stimulate private investment into the Maltese economy.
Economic Growth is expected to be sustained in the following 
years, with real GDP growth forecasts of 4.7% and 4.5% for 2023 
and 2024 respectively.
56
5. A Malta that is Pleasant to Live In 
This is a Budget that is not afraid to discuss our country’s real 
challenges. After the need for good jobs and pay levels, the 
topmost challenge that the people want us to address is the 
environment and sustainability in construction.
The density and small size of our country places limits on space for 
recreation, and therefore we must safeguard and enhance what 
little we have. Our commitment towards a better environment 
goes beyond lip service. We are in actual fact providing the 
necessary additional funds to push the environment forward. 
We are increasing the environmental allocation notwithstanding 
the financial impact of the pandemic. We are making substantial 
investment, to counter climate change and green economy 
challenges, to manage environmental sites and urban greening, 
to manage waste, and for sustainable planning and construction.
5.1 Sustainable Development 
In the construction sector, as much as volume is important for 
the industry, for others it is important to consider the building’s 
aesthetics, the impact on the surroundings, building in an ethical 
and responsible way, and the development of the community.
The industry agrees with the need to license building contractors. 
I think that this is an important step, as long as it is taken seriously 
and enforced without fear. I also believe that such a licence 
should strike abusers with an iron fist. Abuse does not refer just 
to the building methods, but also to respect for the surroundings 
and neighbours, and above all the workers on the site.
57
This licence could represent a certificate of quality for responsible 
operators, for whom we are also ready to consider incentives. 
There are many operators in the construction sector who are 
professional, want a sustainable environment, and understand 
the need to improve the industry’s reputation.
In this sector law enforcement is of utmost importance, and I 
believe that in recent years not enough enforcement has been 
carried out. This is a challenge that goes beyond the Government 
of the day, as the shortcomings on this side of Parliament are 
matched by shortcomings on the other side, such as the 2006 
Rationalisation Plan.
I believe that we need to reform this sector in the context 
of the modern world, whereby we regenerate abandoned 
properties and build with aesthetic sensibility, with typical 
Maltese characteristics and as many green and renewable energy 
considerations as possible.
On these lines, in fact, I will be announcing a series of incentives 
centred around this thought.
 
5.1.1 Tax exemption on sale and purchase of property that is
vacant, located in a UCA, or built in a traditional style 
Capital gains tax and stamp duty will no longer be due on the 
first €750,000 of the sale price, for properties that were built 
more than twenty years ago and have been vacant for more 
than seven years, for properties that are in a UCA, and for new 
properties that are built in a typical traditional Maltese style and 
architecture. We want to see buildings with beautiful balconies 
58
and facades showcasing Maltese heritage, typical Maltese doors, 
and regeneration of old derelict properties. This measure applies 
also where a promise of sale has been entered into, but the sale 
contract is yet to be concluded.
In addition, first-time buyers of such properties in Malta will 
receive a grant of €15,000.
5.1.2 Incentives for Gozitan couples 
First-time buyers who buy these types of property in Gozo 
will receive a grant of double the value, that is €30,000. This 
measure is important to encourage more Gozitan young people 
and couples to build their future in Gozo.
These two measures will come into force the day after the Budget 
presentation and will apply for a period of three years to allow 
for gradual progress.
5.1.3 Grant on the value of VAT paid 
As from tomorrow, that is 12 October, anyone buying or already 
in possession of these types of properties will also be given a 
grant on the value of VAT paid up to a maximum of €54,000 
on the first €300,000 incurred in restoration and finishing 
works. We are introducing this grant as we are cognisant that 
regenerating such properties entails higher than average costs, 
and the Government is committed to help in this regard. This 
applies also to those who have already purchased property and 
are in the process of carrying out restoration works.
59
To prevent speculative activity and ensure that these measures 
are actually enjoyed by families, a set of regulations will be 
introduced, including that the property cannot be divided.
We will extend by a further year the stamp duty reduction 
schemes applicable to first-time buyers, second-time buyers, 
and property acquisitions in Gozo. At the same time, existing 
measures aimed at mitigating the impact of the pandemic on 
this sector will end as previously stipulated, that is in June 2022.
5.1.4 Further investment in the Building and Construction
Authority 
The Building and Construction Authority, which was established 
this year, will bring under one umbrella all Government entities 
related to the Building and Construction industry: the Building 
Regulation Office, the Masons Board, and the Building Regulation 
Board.
Through this Authority we want to ensure that all construction-
related activities in our country are carried out in accordance 
with rigorous standards and that our buildings are of a good 
quality level.
The coming year will herald the publication of a bill on the so-
called ‘Document F’, which the architect uses to draw up the 
Building Envelope plan, and on which basis the engineer then 
draws up the Building Services plans for the same site. Once 
this is concluded and approved, our buildings will consume less 
energy as a result.
60
The Government remains committed to introduce the first Building 
Code during 2022, covering demolition works, excavation and 
construction, and devoting particular attention to Third Party 
Rights. Not only that, but to ensure that the said code is properly 
applied, the Authority will also push forward legislation which 
will provide for the role of a Construction Project Manager on 
the building site, who will ensure that whatever is stipulated is 
executed in the most professional manner, as it should.
5.1.5 Intelligent planning for a pleasant urban environment 
The Planning Authority will introduce an aesthetics policy as 
well as a set of measures to encourage development that is 
more comprehensive, uniform, and respectful of our country’s 
urban environment.
In addition, the Planning Authority has applied for European 
funds to launch the Built Heritage Restoration Scheme, through 
which we will be able to give historical buildings a new lease 
of life.
5.1.6 Afforestation
A few weeks ago, a group of architects put forward an interesting 
proposal based on the afforestation work currently being 
undertaken by the Government at the Inwadar Park, extending 
from the Xgħajra side to Żonqor, on the basis of the Management 
Plan for the Inwadar Park covering until the year 2027.
This is a zone that incorporates agricultural land, private land, 
and other areas allowing for the exploration of all possibilities 
to reach the afforestation aims for this park.
61
We are committed to implement this proposal to rehabilitate 
stretches of land in this Park, while planting thousands of trees 
that are suitable for the typology of the surroundings. The aim 
of this project is not only to give Malta a different aesthetic 
appearance on maps, but also to eventually turn this National 
Park into a wooded area larger than that of Buskett, to be 
enjoyed by everyone and also serve as a tourist attraction.
This project, which will be implemented over a period of five 
years with an investment of €20 million, will also ensure its 
sustainability, particularly in water management and protection 
of Inwadar’s biodiversity. We will be collaborating with all 
stakeholders for these to be able to contribute and participate 
in this project’s success. These include farmers and other people 
who use this park regularly.
5.2 Strategy for Carbon Neutral Economic Development 
To ensure continuous progress in line with the provisions of the 
Low Carbon Development Strategy, we will set up a Monitoring 
Board which will supervise the strategy’s implementation and 
report on progress on a regular basis.
5.2.1 Green spaces in urban zones, public gardens and parks 
In recent months we announced and started implementing the 
urban greening projects, an initiative aimed at originating – in a 
creative way – open, safe and green spaces in our urban centres. 
The projects we will be carrying out in Żabbar, Qormi, Ħamrun 
and Mosta will be financed through the Government capital 
investment as well as funding from the National Development 
and Social Fund (NDSF). We will also be taking care to ensure 
62
that, once they are completed, these projects are maintained 
in a good state.
We will ensure that San Anton Gardens get the merited revamp 
within a short period of time.
We will continue working on vertical green wall projects, green 
roofs such as the one being done on the San Ġorġ Preca Lyceum, 
and embellishment of gardens such as Romeo Romano Garden, 
Spencer Garden and Belveder Garden.
Work has also been ongoing on the Santa Venera Regional 
Road roofing project, which requires a multi-million investment. 
Various studies, including geotechnical ones, have already been 
carried out, and the Government is now exploring how this 
project can potentially be transformed into a public-private 
partnership.
Similarly, the Government will proceed with studies to explore 
the permanent pedestrianisation, in the form of a garden, of St 
Anne Street in Floriana.
We will commence, among others, the restoration of public 
gardens in several localities, and the restoration of various 
squares and open spaces in town and village cores. We are also 
working on the development of larger spaces such as the Family 
Park in Bengħajsa and the regeneration of the Marsascala Family 
Park, Cottonera Gardens and St Clement Park in Żabbar.
63
During 2022, the Government will continue to rehabilitate valleys 
to eliminate invasive species, restore walls and plant indigenous 
trees.
A pilot project is also being launched to create community 
gardens in different localities, where residents would be able to 
grow vegetables, fruits and flowers.
Work efforts will be stepped up to complete various phases of 
the Ta’ Qali National Park project. By the end of this year, the 
Concert Area and Formal Garden as well as the Adventure Park 
phases will be completed. It is planned that the phases that 
include the car park as well as the cycling and jogging track 
will be implemented over the coming year. This is the largest 
open area being made available for the public to enjoy, with 
its open space being set to increase by an area larger than 60 
football pitches, over 60,000 mature trees to be planted, and 
landscaping works to cover more than 86,000 square metres. 
Works are bound to commence on the Drainage and Potable 
Water Treatment Plant, amounting to about €4 million, which 
will supply water for the park and thus render it sustainable.
Furthermore, the Government is making plans to transform 
Schreiber’s ground in Pace Grasso into an open space for the 
community, where an area of 12,000 square metres is to be 
turned into an educational space with the planting of over 165 
trees, 2,500 shrubs, and 1,500 ornamental plants.
64
5.2.2 Launching of project to help Maltese companies invest
in sustainable environmental projects 
Mr Speaker, our wish is that, as is happening beyond our shores, 
more private investors would be able to choose to direct 
their capital to Maltese companies that invest in sustainable 
environmental projects, which boost social progress and 
business governance.
For this purpose, over the coming weeks we will be launching a 
project to help Maltese companies evaluate the environmental 
or social impact of such projects. This information will be 
publicly accessible so that private investors would be able to 
invest directly in shares or bonds of such companies meeting 
the required environmental, social and corporate governance 
criteria.
Besides incentivising private investment in these Maltese 
enterprises, this project will encourage more Maltese companies 
to integrate ESG criteria as part of their investment activities. This 
is an indispensable process for our country to fulfil its ambition 
to be a carbon free economy by 2050.
5.2.3 Investment in sustainable enterprises 
Linked with this, we wil launch the process that will enable 
public and private entities to invest in green and environmental 
projects with the aim of creating a carbon credit surplus that 
could then be acquired, on a voluntary basis, by other public 
or private entities to help them meet their own carbon targets. 
65
5.2.4 Restoration, conservation and monitoring of protected
sites 
Through a collaboration between the Environment and Resources 
Authority and Ambjent Malta, we will continue implementing the 
Natura 2000 Sites’ Management Plans, by way of natural habitat 
conservation interventions. These include planting of indigenous 
trees and shrubs, building of rubble walls, restoration of existing 
wells and reservoirs, installation of irrigation systems, and also 
installation of surveillance and fire-fighting systems.
Such interventions will be stepped up at various sites, including 
some where work has already started, such as Comino, il-Magħluq 
at Marsascala, the Victoria Lines zone and Għadira s-Safra.
5.2.5 Gozo rubble walls restoration project 
The project for the restoration and reconstruction of rubble 
walls all around Gozo, financed by European funds exceeding 
€10 million, is currently being implemented. The aim is to repair 
over 30 kilometres of rubble walls – across several localities in 
Gozo – which collapsed over the years and are presently in a 
dilapidated state.
5.3 Sustainability 
The greening of the country is linked to sustainability principles 
and the changes we need to make to minimise our impact on the 
environment, eventually leading to our country becoming carbon 
neutral. All this makes sense not just from a moral perspective 
but also economically.
66
5.3.1 Schemes for clean energy use 
The Government remains committed to invest in the energy 
sector to offer citizens an efficient and affordable service. With 
a view to ensuring stability, addressing climate change, and 
continuing to improve air quality, we will keep on investing in 
diversified, efficient and renewable energy.
During this year, the Government has continued to implement 
schemes and measures that lead to more efficient production 
and use of energy, including renewable energy like PV panels, 
solar water heaters and heat pumps.
Over the coming year we will continue to help with more schemes 
for investment in photovoltaic panels as well as batteries for 
energy storage. A grant will also be given for restoration of 
domestic cisterns and purchase of solar water heaters and heat 
pump water heaters. The schemes for restoration of wells in 
residential homes and for the replacement and purchase of a 
reverse osmosis system will also be extended.
Next year we will continue offering free house visits aimed 
at guiding the most vulnerable families on electricity use and 
replacement of home appliances by ones that are more energy 
efficient. This is tied to an information campaign about efficient 
technologies that can be used at home, with further information 
about how the Government can help.
67
5.3.2 Schemes for voluntary and sports organisations to invest
in efficient energy 
As promised in our Electoral Manifesto, we have helped many 
sports and voluntary organisations to invest in alternative energy 
with the aim of reducing energy consumption. Up to 2021, 61 
organisations have benefited from this scheme. The third call was 
issued a few weeks ago. In the coming year, we will be issuing 
the schemes again enabling voluntary and sports organisations 
to invest in efficient energy.
5.3.3 The Shore-to-Ship project 
We want to keep investing in projects that yield cleaner air for 
the people. Consequently, the Grand Harbour Shore-to-Ship 
project will be continued, while calls for offers in connection 
with the Freeport Shore-to-Ship project will soon be published.
5.4 Launch of two projects related to renewable energy
storage batteries
Following the success of the pilot project on batteries for 
renewable energy storage at Għajn Educational Centre, the 
Energy and Water Agency will be launching two other projects 
in public buildings to demonstrate the application of this 
technology in Malta.
5.5 Fund for installation of solar panel systems on
Government buildings 
We believe that the Government should lead by example in 
switching to renewable energy. For this purpose, we will allocate 
funds for Government buildings to be equipped with solar panel 
68
systems, where this is technically possible, so that a substantial 
part of the Government’s energy consumption needs would be 
provided from renewable sources.
5.6 Installation of new efficient lighting in Valletta streets 
From the smallest to the largest project, our aim is for our 
gardens and open spaces to be self-sufficient in their water 
management and to have lighting installations powered by 
renewable energy.
During 2022, we will be installing new and efficient street lighting 
in Valletta, including on places of interest and church facades. 
In its second phase, the project will entail the design and new 
installation of lighting along Valletta’s ring road and pedestrian 
zones.
5.7 Scheme for Sustainable Development in communities
through Local Councils 
To reinforce the concept of sustainable development in our 
communities, we are allocating funds for Local Councils to set 
up projects related to this theme. This will be done through 
the ‘Designing Sustainable Localities Competition’, which will 
consider proposals with tangible aims that meet sustainability 
development targets on a local level and address climate change. 
To recognise the work of catalysts in the areas of climate change, 
development of the green and circular economy and prosperity, 
we will be launching the Sustainable Development Awards.
69
5.8 Distribution of starter-kits with sustainable products
for babies
So that parents also participate in this drive, we will distribute 
starter-kits with sustainable baby products to all parents 
welcoming a child into their family.
70
6. A Modern Malta 
6.1 Free Public Transport for all 
Mr Speaker, this Government has always put forward measures 
that seek practical solutions to address perennial problems. 
The time has come to take the next step for the transport 
sector to start addressing the traffic congestion problem in our 
country. After the disaster brought about by others, it was this 
Government that introduced a sensible approach in the operation 
of public transport in our country. Now we are about to make 
the next leap forward.
Mr Speaker, I have always been taught that whenever I set out 
to do something, I should do it right first time.
It is my pleasure to announce that this Government is in a position 
to start providing a free Public Transport service to all Maltese 
and Gozitan persons and residents of the Maltese Islands, with 
effect from 1 October of next year.
Mr Speaker, as a result we will be the second country in Europe 
to make public transport free of charge.
This means that, along with all the other benefits I have already 
announced, a worker using public transport on a daily basis will 
be saving more than €300 per year.
71
Furthermore, following Government’s publication of the mass 
transport studies carried out by an international company, the 
consultation process will be continued.
 
6.2 Maritime transport 
Following the success achieved by the fast ferry service between 
Malta and Gozo, the Government will keep up its efforts to 
increase the number of quays, enabling the creation of alternative 
routes and hence reducing dependence on private vehicles. To 
this end, we will see the completion of quay constructions at 
Sliema and Bormla, the reconstruction of the quays and a new 
promenade between Birgu and Kalkara, and the reconstruction 
of the Buġibba breakwater.
6.3 Increased financial grant to incentivise the purchase
of cleaner vehicles 
The financial grant aiming to incentivise the acquisition of new 
electricity-powered cars or Plug-In Hybrids will increase by 
€3,000 as from the day after the Budget presentation. Thus, 
the grant payable upon the purchase of electric cars or plug-in 
hybrids is set to increase from €8,000 to €11,000, and this would 
go up to a maximum of €12,000 in the event that the vehicle 
scrappage scheme is availed of as well.
6.4 Increased financial grant for scrappage of polluting
vehicles in Gozo 
The financial grant of the scheme for the scrappage of polluting 
cars in Gozo will increase by €1,000, to go up to €2,000.
72
6.5 Extension of other schemes promoting cleaner
vehicles 
We are extending for another year the measures relating to the 
purchase of electric vehicles, which include an exemption from 
registration tax and an exemption from payment of the annual 
road licence fee for a period of five years from the date of first 
registration, applicable to electric and electric plug-in vehicles.
As from the beginning of 2023, the capping for plug-in hybrid 
vehicles will increase from 30 to 50 kilometres autonomy on 
battery.
The special rate applicable for residences where electric vehicle 
owners charge the battery overnight will remain in force.
The schemes consisting of a grant equivalent to a full refund of 
VAT paid on bicycles and electronic bicycles will be extended 
once again. The same applies to the scheme which incentivises 
the purchase of motorcycles, scooters, pedelecs and bicycles 
assisted by an electric motor, and to the grant for those who 
convert their vehicle to run on gas instead of petrol.
The scheme for wheelchair-accessible vehicles used for the 
transport of passengers for hire or reward is being renewed as 
well.
73
6.6 Scheme for installation of photovoltaic panels on
vehicles 
We will launch a new scheme whereby vehicles such as minibuses, 
coaches and trucks that have photovoltaic panels installed on 
top, are given a grant up to a maximum of €900.
6.7 Emissions reduction grant 
A scheme will be launched to encourage minibus, coach and 
truck operators to reduce their vehicles’ smoke emissions by 
installing diesel particle filters (DPF) and selective catalytic 
reduction (SCR) systems.
6.8 Assistance to enterprises to switch from fuel-powered
vehicles to new electric vehicles 
The transition to a more sustainable industry calls for investment 
in mobility and distribution solutions based on clean transport. 
Therefore, Malta Enterprise will launch a scheme designed to 
help enterprises replace their fuel-powered vehicles by electric 
ones, along with other solutions. The scheme will cover part of 
the cost difference between the fuel-powered and the electric 
vehicles.
Enterprises will benefit from this scheme when they replace their 
existing vehicles with new electric ones.
6.9 Charging points
This Government’s objective is not only to incentivise but 
also to facilitate the switch to clean vehicles across Malta and 
74
Gozo. We can do this by investing in a stronger charging points 
infrastructure. Over the next three years, we will be installing 
around 1,200 charging points around the whole country. This 
investment will be crucial in achieving our decarbonisation 
targets.
 
6.10 Digitalisation of vehicle and ship registration 
The Government will be investing in the replacement of the 
vehicle registration system, where an average of 800 vehicles 
are registered each month, year in year out. The Vessel Tracking 
System will also be replaced by a more modern one, and this 
will fulfil the requirements of both Transport Malta, which is 
responsible for port security, as well as the Armed Forces. 
Besides, we will be embarking on digital investment to modernise 
the ship register and hence continue strengthening Malta’s 
position in the maritime sector.
6.11 Resource management 
6.11.1 Waste 
In the waste management sector, we will continue working 
on the chain of multi-million projects that together make up 
EcoHive, which is the largest investment ever made in waste 
management in our country. Despite the limitations of the 
present infrastructure compared to our target for the coming 
years, we are already seeing considerable improvements in 
recycling rates, with 2021 being the best year over the past 
nineteen years.
75
The Waste to Energy plant, which is part of this chain of projects, 
with an investment of about €200 million, will be absorbing the 
larger part of the investment, but we are also adding another 
capital allocation to strengthen and improve the company’s 
infrastructure, all forming part of a sound long-term planning 
process.
Meanwhile, in collaboration with Local Councils, we will start 
introducing smart bins with controlled access and continuous 
surveillance to enable commercial entities to separate waste at 
any time of day.
Now that the Civic Amenity Sites will house a “Reuse Centres” 
facility, which will allow the reuse of objects such as toys, 
ceramics, books and furniture, we can also start thinking about 
the possibility of setting up a “Repair Centre”. This would be a 
place where certain equipment could be repaired and reused 
instead of being sent for recycling. A feasibility study on the 
setting up of such a centre will be carried out. Apart from offering 
repair services, a centre like this could also offer opportunities 
for bartering of used items and also for transformation of objects 
for alternative use, better known as repurposing or refashioning.
6.11.2 Energy
The Government is aware that the demand for electricity in our 
country is ever-increasing, both due to economic growth as 
well as to new demand expected to develop as a result of the 
electrification of transport and the shore-to-ship operations.
76
Therefore, as announced earlier this year, we have started working 
towards the installation of a second cable interconnector with 
Sicily. While at the moment studies are underway to identify 
the optimal route for this cable, during 2022 these studies 
will be intensified to include detailed surveys from different 
perspectives such as maritime, geophysical, geotechnical and 
environmental.
 
We are planning for tomorrow: thanks to advances in technology, 
hydrogen development may be one of several available sources 
of clean energy. Having secured a derogation, during 2022 
technical and financial feasibility studies will be undertaken on 
hydrogen transmission through a pipeline.
In addition, in order to improve service quality, we will accelerate 
the implementation of a hefty investment plan in Enemalta’s 
Distribution Network. We will invest in various voltage levels and 
continue to increase automation across the network. We know 
that, with such an extensive network, it is normal to experience 
some faults. Nevertheless, we are committed to reduce the 
frequency as well as the length of delays in cases of interruption, 
with a view to serving the public better.
Despite trying to claim otherwise, in 2009 the Nationalist 
Government devised the water and electricity billing system 
that is in use to this day. Since that time, ARMS has continued 
to operate the same system, and the tariffs have changed only 
when we reduced them in 2013. There is also a ruling of the 
Regulator for Energy and Water Services which confirms that the 
utility bills are being calculated properly and in line with the law.
77
Nevertheless, we are aware of the criticism surrounding this 
system. Having listened to the people’s wishes, we will be 
announcing a new system that is fair for everyone without 
impacting any client negatively. Accordingly, we will also amend 
the law to enable us to introduce this new system.
We did not rush, whereas others did, running the risk that many 
consumers would be negatively affected as a result of a hasty 
decision.
Through this new system, consumers will be able to save 
unutilised cheap units and use them in periods of higher 
consumption. This Government’s strategy is to promote prudent 
consumption, in accordance with the national decarbonisation 
plan and our journey towards more sustainable living. With this 
system, consumers will not be faced with a surprisingly high 
bill at the end of the year, there will be no Feed-In Tariff losses, 
and above all, no one will be losing out on the Eco-Reduction.
6.11.3 Water
The first reverse osmosis plant designed by the Water Services 
Corporation, located in Ħondoq ir-Rummien in Gozo, is set to 
commence operations with an investment of about €11 million.
We will carry on with the New Water network extension project, 
as well as the consolidation of the sewage systems in the 
Northern and Southern areas of Malta, which should help in 
meeting the additional demand while at the same time continue 
to improve the marine environment thanks to the more resilient 
sewage treatment.
78
The shoring up of the sewage treatment plant at Sant’Antnin is in 
its final stages, and tests are now being carried out in preparation 
for its commissioning.
 
6.11.4 Food, Agriculture and Fisheries 
After having set up an Agency to take charge of the food sector 
earlier this year, we can now start developing a national policy 
for a stronger food chain with the aim of overcoming challenges 
and creating opportunities in the diverse fields related to food 
production.
To incentivise more effective use of agricultural land by farmers 
and boost organic production in our country, we will be offering 
incentives to landowners to enter into arrangements with farmers 
who wish to use the fields for organic production.
Following the implementation of the fruit and vegetable market 
(il-Pitkalija) reform earlier this year, we will be investing in the 
necessary facilities to be able to sell our farmers’ fruit and 
vegetables in better packaging and with a more attractive 
presentation, in line with market standards and to enable them 
to stand out from other products. We will also assist farmers to 
improve the quality of their products and obtain certification. 
To prevent fraud in the sale of the Maltese agricultural product, 
we will strengthen the control function within the Malta Food 
Agency by establishing an enforcement unit.
79
We will be undertaking projects to upgrade the infrastructure of 
the water and electricity service pillars in fishing ports, as well 
as to improve the Landing Site facilities in Gozo.
In order to maximise the utilisation of agricultural land for 
food production while meeting the targets of the Farm to 
Fork strategy, we will be launching a carbon farming initiative. 
Through this initiative we will hand out grants up to a maximum 
of €8,000 to motivate farmers whose agricultural land is not 
currently being used for cultivation or is out of production 
or is being used for low-value production, to convert it into 
agroforestry systems based on fruit trees. Further details will 
be given upon the launch of the scheme.
80
7. A Healthy Malta 
Mr Speaker, despite the challenges we faced during the global 
pandemic, the Government has remained steadfastly committed 
to safeguard the health and safety of all the Maltese and 
Gozitan people, through the timely acquisition of effective 
COVID-19 vaccines. The Government will continue with its drive 
to administer booster doses of this vaccine in accordance with 
the advice of the Health Authorities.
For the coming year, the new Outpatients building project as well 
as the works across various Health Centres will remain a priority.
We will invest in the extension of the project for the construction 
of a new blood bank, together with a specialised centre for the 
collection of blood, and processing and storage of tissue and 
stem cells.
We will also invest in the infrastructure of the Accident and 
Emergency Department and the Medical Imaging Department, 
as well as in the third Cardiac Catheterisation Suite. Investment 
will be made in MR Linac, which equipment will be providing 
advanced treatment of its type as well as a shorter treatment 
period, for certain types of cancer.
Next year, additional facilities will be leased by Mater Dei so that 
the ever-increasing demand for acute and elective care services 
is addressed in the most efficient and effective manner.
81
7.1 Mental health
The Government will continue following closely the new Acute 
Psychiatric Care Hospital construction project, in the vicinity of 
Mater Dei Hospital. Until the new hospital is completed, an acute 
psychiatry hospital facility will be leased.
Consistent with the Mental Health Strategy, the Government is 
committed to bring mental health related services closer to the 
client. This will take place through an increase in the capacity 
of the services offered at Mount Carmel Hospital, which is 
expected to translate into various initiatives that support assisted 
community living. In the meantime, works on the modernisation 
of the Mount Carmel wards will proceed.
7.2 Additional Health Services 
Remote Patient Monitoring is a pilot project introduced with the 
aim of performing regular and continuous monitoring of sugar 
levels in children under sixteen years of age who suffer from 
Type I Diabetes. This initiative will be continued and gradually 
extended to cover also young persons aged between 17 and 21 
who suffer from the same condition.
An improvement in the quality of life will also be experienced by 
adults who were born hard of hearing – these will keep receiving 
two hearing aids if this is clinically indicated.
The Government will further its collaboration with Hospice Malta 
to start providing a palliative care service from St Michael’s 
82
Hospice to patients who have unfortunately been diagnosed 
with terminal cancer.
7.3 Sports
Next year Sport Malta will continue investing in more sports 
facilities, including at the Marsa Complex, the Olympic-size 
swimming pool in Bormla, and works to be carried out on the 
Marsascala, Valletta and Marsaxlokk waterpolo pitches. A new 
football ground for Msida St Joseph is also on the cards.
For rowing enthusiasts, Sport Malta will invest in a national 
rowing tank, which could also be used for training in this national 
sport.
The Outdoor Velodrome project will be incorporated within the 
phases of the ongoing Ta’ Qali project.
Works on the Aquatic and Sports Centre is proceeding at a 
good pace. Thanks to this investment, the island and people 
of Gozo will be able to enjoy an Olympic level pool as well as a 
sports pavilion in the heart of Victoria, Gozo. This is the largest 
investment in the sports sector that has ever been made for 
Gozo.
In 2023, Malta will be hosting the Small Nations Games, and this 
year we have already channelled funds amounting to about €7 
million to sports associations as well as the Maltese Olympic 
Committee to invest with a view to achieving better results.
83
In the past few days, the plan for a motorsport facility involving 
an investment of €20 million was launched in collaboration with 
the Malta Motorsport Association.
We will ensure that the Marsa Sports Complex continues to 
extend its facilities to accommodate a gymnastics centre where 
athletes would be able to perform their training using adequate 
and safe facilities.
This project will continue building on various initiatives and 
projects aimed at providing local athletes with facilities of the 
highest level.
7.4 Culture and the Arts 
The arts, culture and entertainment sector is an essential part 
of the country’s social and economic fabric. The Government 
will continue helping and motivating artists, producers and 
promoters of artistic, cultural and entertainment activities, 
so that these can keep contributing in full to the artistic and 
economic recovery of the sector. To achieve this purpose, it is 
with pleasure that I announce the following measures:
1. The income tax rate for artists will be 7.5% and this will apply 
as from basis year 2022.
2. For the purposes of artists’ income tax, we will introduce a 
mechanism which will establish artists’ income on the basis 
of a three-year average.
3. We are allocating €1 million for the creation of a guarantee 
scheme for independent artistic activities, aimed at helping 
84
producers and promoters recoup costs that cannot be 
covered due to unexpected restrictions that might become 
necessary should circumstances change. 
4. We will continue strengthening the scheme that gives 
assistance for seats that cannot be sold in case of new event 
restrictions. To this end, we are allocating €2 million.
5. We will create an assistance scheme, which will be run by 
the Malta Arts Council, for independent art projects. We are 
allocating €2 million for this purpose.
 
7.5 The Broadcasting Sector 
In the Broadcasting sector, PBS will continue its investment in a 
modern TV House that can better serve the needs of its channels. 
The second phase will entail investment in a television stage, 
while the third phase will comprise the development of Malex 
House’s production facilities to house a new newsroom as well 
as news studios.
85
8. A Just Malta 
Throughout the current year we have continued working to 
ensure that Malta complies with the recommendations put 
forward by the Venice Commission and Greco.
We have also carried out reforms that seek to address the 
MONEYVAL recommendations, together with work to strengthen 
the Asset Recovery Office structure through measures providing 
for the recovery of criminality proceeds, with an investment 
topping €2.2 million.
8.1 FATF
A work plan has been drawn up so that the Maltese authorities 
can address the plan of action presented by FATF, and this is 
serving as a guide for the work of the country’s investigative 
authorities. Work on implementation of this action plan is 
progressing at a good pace. The collective efforts that are 
currently ongoing are expected to yield the desired results.
8.2 Justice
We will keep working to ensure that the Attorney General’s 
Office continues to take on additional prosecution functions in 
coordination with the Police. This with the aim of developing a 
specialised prosecution service at the Attorney General’s Office, 
while the Police Force focuses on investigation of offences. In this 
way the prosecution service offered would be of a higher quality 
while delays in the criminal justice system would be reduced.
86
The process has moved a step forward a few days ago, by way 
of a Legal Notice providing for the Transfer of Prosecutions, 
which came into force on 1 October 2021.
In the Judiciary, the retirement age of judges and magistrates 
has been extended, and we have also made new appointments 
on the Judges’ Bench.
In the area of Civil Procedure, we have enacted a law aimed at 
reducing the backlog of cases pending at the Appeals Court, 
by making it possible for the courts at appeal level to grant a 
sitting only for those cases where it deems necessary. We are also 
reducing the pending workload by increasing the compositions 
of the Civil Appeal (Superior) Courts so as to hasten the appeals 
process and the citizen is served better and within a reasonable 
time.
8.3 Legal aid 
We will keep investing in legal aid, with a view to creating a 
digital system whereby prospective clients eligible for legal aid 
would be able to apply online, as well as through the servizz.gov 
service hubs located in the regions and villages around Malta.
8.4 Security
Security will remain one of the main pillars of this Government. 
It is not only important to have a good standard of living, but 
our society also needs to feel safe.
 
87
8.5 Disciplinary Corps 
During the current year, the first set of collective agreements 
for the Disciplinary Corps have been sealed, with an investment 
of over €15 million, such that the 5,000 employees forming part 
of the Disciplinary Corps now enjoy better working conditions 
and new rights.
Together with this, a transformation strategy is being 
implemented, with investment being undertaken in infrastructure, 
specialised equipment, new vehicles and human resources 
training.
8.6 Community Policing
Throughout the coming year the Community Policing service will 
be extended to cover several new localities, including Żabbar, 
Xgħajra, Marsascala, San Ġwann, Żebbuġ, Gżira, Msida, Pietà, 
Mosta, Mġarr, Żurrieq, Safi and Kirkop.
8.7 Armed Forces of Malta 
With an investment of about €50 million, work is currently 
underway on the construction of a new vessel to be added to the 
Maritime Squadron of the Armed Forces. This launch will be the 
largest one of its kind in our country and will contribute towards 
stronger surveillance and protection of Malta’s maritime borders.
8.8 Civil protection 
The Civil Protection Department will keep investing in vehicle 
replacement, including further acquisitions of new trucks, special 
88
vans that are suitable for our country’s narrow streets, equipment 
used by workers to reach high-rise buildings, as well as modern 
technology and above all protective clothing for our officials.
Members of our Corps are never far away from danger, and it 
is our duty to give them the best tools to work with. May I take 
this opportunity to express this Parliament’s gratitude for the 
precious work that they do.
8.9 Corradino Correctional Facility 
During this year, the Correctional Services Agency has continued 
to enhance its rehabilitation services, including with the 
engagement of more professionals from the medical, psychiatric 
and social sectors.
The first medical facility at the Corradino Correctional Facility, 
where prisoners are assisted professionally by doctors and 
nurses, has been completed. Construction works are due to start 
on the first rehabilitation centre of its kind within the precincts 
of the facility, catering for about 140 persons.
8.10 Victim Support Agency 
During the coming year, the Agency will be further strengthened, 
while it will continue to improve its services across the various 
facets of victim rights, by remaining accessible in the most 
efficient way, while at the same time increasing the number of 
staff and professionals who serve within it. 
89
8.11 Community Projects 
Over a span of three years, LESA funds of over €3 million directed 
to Local Councils and the Association of Local Councils are 
being utilised to implement projects in various localities across 
Malta and Gozo.
 
In this way, the Government is ploughing back the funds 
generated from contraventions into the localities, to carry out 
beneficial projects in towns and villages for the enjoyment of 
our families, children, young people and the elderly.
8.12 Irregular Immigration 
The drop in the number of arrivals over the past months was the 
result of the decisions we took, especially the work that followed 
the agreement concerning irregular immigration entered into 
with Libya last year.
We have continued to address the burden of irregular 
immigration through the return of rejected asylum seekers to 
their country of origin, and through further immigrant relocations 
to other European Union Member States. Immediately after the 
presentation of last year’s Budget, a Returns Unit was set up to 
focus specifically on the return of immigrants, whether forced 
or voluntary. We have started and will continue beefing up the 
human resources of the Immigration Police and the International 
Protection Agency.
This strategy is already bearing fruit, and between January and 
September 2021 we registered the largest number of returns of 
90
irregular immigrants back to their country of origin ever since 
the irregular immigration phenomenon reared its head for the 
first time twenty years ago.
Throughout these efforts, we also need to safeguard the interests 
of our communities. We have drastically reduced the number of 
people living in the Marsa immigrant centre, and we are at an 
advanced stage in our plans to close down this centre. That is 
not all, as we also want to regenerate this zone and see that the 
facilities and space in this area are used by clubs, children and 
young persons. We are doing this without creating new burdens 
for other localities.
8.13 Foreign Affairs 
The coming year will be a very important one for Malta’s 
role within the United Nations since, with effect from June, 
preparations will be stepped up in anticipation of Malta taking 
up a non-permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council 
for two whole years, throughout 2023 and 2024.
Over these last weeks, Diplomatic officials have been deployed 
to gradually start establishing a Diplomatic presence, for the 
first time, in Brazil and also in Ethiopia.
We have invested heavily in the provision of humanitarian 
assistance to regions struck by a catastrophe or crisis. We have 
done this both with very distant countries such as India and 
the Dominican Republic, as well as with countries closer to 
home like Libya and Tunisia. We plan to keep honouring this 
91
commitment over the coming years through the Development 
Assistance Fund.
Over the coming year, Malta will continue to be an important 
voice in favour of multilateralism. A small sovereign state like 
ours needs to keep insisting that international conflicts cannot 
be solved by a sole country’s unilateral initiatives. Rather, we 
believe in the use of international organisations’ platforms to 
reach compromise in favour of peace.
8.14 Animal Protection and Rights 
As a sign of Government’s commitment in favour of animal 
protection and rights, next year we will draw up a national 
strategy on the protection and proper treatment of animals.
Throughout the coming year, we will start exploring the possibility 
of opening a modern rehoming centre for the adoption of 
animals, including stray ones.
8.15 Equality 
In the equality field, we plan to continue working for our country 
to remain one of the most inclusive ones in Europe. In this regard, 
we will oversee initiatives such as the equality mark certification 
for local companies, the Empowerment for Diversity project, and 
the expansion of the ‘Jiena Nappartjeni’ (I Belong) programme. 
We will also be implementing a strategy against racism together 
with social partners and the media.
92
9. The Malta of Tomorrow 
Mr Speaker,
We have announced one of the largest social and environmental 
packages our country has ever had, but at the same time we 
will take care to utilise public finances in a sensible and prudent 
manner.
This is against the backdrop where, this year, our country is 
expected to register a deficit of 11.1% of the Gross Domestic 
Product, almost one percentage point less than the figure 
that was forecast last April. At the same time, national debt is 
projected to increase to 61.3% of the Gross Domestic Product, 
since we have continued to support and safeguard our families, 
jobs and businesses.
For next year, since economic growth is expected to accelerate, 
we are forecasting that the deficit will go down to 5.6% while 
the debt level is bound to increase marginally to 61.8% of the 
Gross Domestic Product.
The deficit is expected to continue decreasing over the following 
years to reach a level of 2.9% of the Gross Domestic Product in 
2024. The debt as a proportion of the Gross Domestic Product 
is projected at 62.4% for the same year.
Here it is important to point out a premise surrounding these 
forecasts. The volatile situation that the pandemic has brought 
about is there for everyone to see. Energy prices and, on a 
93
broader scale, inflation in general could well be next year’s 
challenges. In light of this, the deficit forecast may be revised 
by 1.4% to reach 7.0% in the event that Government decides to 
reduce the impact, from the financial aspect, on families and 
business.
Above all, we will stick to the realism and prudence that have 
guided this Government. We are not afraid to say that we are 
not perfect. We are not afraid to speak about the challenges, 
large and small, being faced by Malta. This is why the people 
continue to believe in us and trust us.
We are not afraid to speak about the challenges because this 
Government also has the solutions for them. We were not 
afraid in the face of predictions of an unemployment figure of 
55,000, we were not afraid when we were told the economy 
would collapse, and in the same way we will not be afraid to be 
a shield for workers and employers. As we were not afraid then, 
we will not be afraid now of the challenges that all countries are 
currently facing in terms of recovery, cost of living, transport and 
inflation. We are not afraid because we know we can overcome 
them.
This is a Government that has a clear plan on how to increase 
economic development and quality work.
This is a Government that has the will to calibrate itself on the 
environment, sustainability and the green economy, where we 
believe that the future of our country lies, and about which 
94
today we gave a clear message, devoting the largest package in 
Maltese history in favour of the environment and sustainability.
This is a Government that above all has a clear vision on where 
it wants to go.
•	
A country that raises its standard of living,
•	
A country that respects the environment,
•	
A country that supports and find ways how to strengthen 
the worker,
•	
A country that takes care of the pensioner year after year, 
after year,
•	
A country that helps the weak stand on their feet, a socially 
conscious country, a country that is not all doom and gloom 
but sees hope and opportunity for everyone.
This is our plan for this country. This is our vision for Malta.
Because the Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta 
that loves.
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta where 
righteousness prevails.
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta where 
success goes to the ones who work hard, not the ones who 
seek favour.
95
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta where study 
and sweat can take you from rags to riches.
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a modern and 
environment-friendly Malta.
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta that beats 
negativity. 
The Malta we want to leave to our children is a Malta that takes 
care of its elderly.
This is the Malta I want to leave to my children. This is the Malta 
we want to leave to our children. 
96
Table A.1
Consolidated Fund 
Tax Revenue
3,952,998  
4,470,600  
5,134,325  
5,377,250  
5,707,700  
Non-Tax Revenue
446,019  
538,779  
570,385  
579,306  
522,772  
Total Revenue
4,399,017  
5,009,379  
5,704,710  
5,956,556  
6,230,472  
Recurrent Expenditure
4,650,277  
5,544,167  
5,329,471  
5,456,639  
5,668,734  
Capital Expenditure
1,037,149  
799,501  
930,897  
1,004,121  
845,245  
Primary Balance
(1,288,409) 
(1,334,289) 
(555,658) 
(504,204) 
(283,507) 
    
Interest Payments
181,205  
185,578  
181,417  
193,696  
208,393  
Recurrent Surplus / (Deficit)
(432,465) 
(720,366) 
193,822  
306,221  
353,345  
Consolidated Fund Surplus / Deficit
(1,469,614) 
(1,519,867) 
(737,075) 
(697,900) 
(491,900) 
Financing
Direct Loan Repayments
(461,583) 
(462,502) 
(469,567) 
(446,190) 
(490,123) 
Early Repayments of MGRSB
(4,123) 
(4,500) 
(5,850) 
(4,750) 
(3,250) 
Contributions to Sinking Funds - Foreign
(50) 
(50) 
(50) 
(50) 
(49) 
Contributions to Special MGS Sinking Fund
(20,000) 
(30,000) 
(25,000) 
(25,000) 
(25,000) 
Equity Acquisition
(36,980) 
(15,038) 
(5,038) 
(538) 
(538) 
EFSF / ESM Credit Line Facility
-
(4,500) 
 -  
 -  
 -  
Repayment of Loans to Government
915
2,226  
2,784  
2,784  
2,784  
Sale of Shares / Assets
889  
889  
889  
889  
889  
(520,932) 
(513,475) 
(501,832) 
(472,855) 
(515,287) 
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement
(1,990,546) 
(2,033,342) 
(1,238,907) 
(1,170,755) 
(1,007,187) 
Foreign Loans
120,000  
300,000  
 -  
-      
-      
Consolidated Fund balance as on 1 January
(357,234) 
(797,993) 
(731,335) 
(770,242) 
(740,997) 
Local Loans
1,429,787  
1,800,000  
1,200,000  
1,200,000  
1,100,000  
1,072,553  
1,002,007  
468,665  
429,758  
359,003  
Consolidated Fund balance as on 31 December 
(797,993) 
(731,335) 
(770,242) 
(740,997) 
(648,184) 
   Consolidated Fund Surplus / Deficit 
(1,469,614) 
(1,519,867) 
(737,075) 
(697,900) 
(491,900) 
201,684  
(25,133) 
(113,625) 
(9,100) 
(4,100) 
(1,267,930) 
(1,545,000) 
(850,700) 
(707,000) 
(496,000) 
13,054,927
13,964,140
15,162,724
16,140,339
17,125,205
General Government Surplus / Deficit 
as a % of Gross Domestic Product
-9.7%
-11.1%
   General Government Surplus / Deficit 
€ '000
-4.4%
-2.9%
€ '000
-5.6%
2021
2022
   Gross Domestic Product
€ '000
   General Government Adjustments 
€ '000
€ '000
Table A.1
2023
Estimates
FISCAL POSITION 2020 - 2024
2024
Actual 
Revised
Estimates
Estimates
2020
10/10/2021    16:16
97
Table A.2
Table A.2
Malta Government Stocks
5,358,625
6,530,822
7,363,520
8,224,528
8,963,892
Malta Government Retail Savings Bonds
380,507
476,007
376,655
284,148
187,075
Treasury Bills
586,500
582,000
640,000
610,000
518,000
Foreign Loans
120,839
420,717
420,591
420,463
420,342
EBU's / Local Councils
168,065
167,566
167,566
167,566
167,566
Currency
90,371
100,393
105,533
111,188
117,407
ESA Rerouted Debt
272,597
284,884
299,884
304,884
304,884
General Government Public Debt 
6,977,504
8,562,389
9,373,749
10,122,777
10,679,166
Gross Domestic Product
13,054,927
13,964,140
15,162,724
16,140,339
17,125,205
Debt as a % of Gross Domestic Product
2023
2024
53.45%
61.32%
61.82%
62.72%
62.36%
STATEMENT OF PUBLIC DEBT
€ '000
2020
2021
2022
tabelli_2020_24_budget speech as amended 10_10_21
10/10/2021   16:19
98
Table A.3
Table A.3
Consolidated Fund 
Tax Revenue
3,952,998 
4,599,000 
4,470,600 
Non-Tax Revenue
446,019 
599,002 
538,779 
Total Revenue
4,399,017 
5,198,002 
5,009,379 
Recurrent Expenditure
4,650,277 
4,971,899 
5,544,167 
Capital Expenditure
1,037,149 
792,817 
799,501 
Primary Balance
(1,288,409)
(566,714)
(1,334,289)
Interest Payments
181,205 
189,825
185,578 
Recurrent Surplus / (Deficit) 
(432,465)
36,278 
(720,366)
Consolidated Fund Surplus / (Deficit)
(1,469,614)
(756,539)
(1,519,867)
Financing
Direct Loan Repayments
(461,583) 
(462,502) 
(462,502) 
Early Repayment of MGRSB
(4,123) 
(4,500) 
(4,500) 
Contributions to Sinking Funds - Foreign
(50) 
(50) 
(50) 
Contribution to Special MGS Sinking Fund
(20,000) 
(30,000) 
(30,000) 
Equity Acquisition
(36,980) 
(10,538) 
(15,038) 
EFSF / ESM Credit Line Facility
 -  
(4,500) 
(4,500) 
Repayment of Loans to Government
915  
2,226  
2,226  
Sale of Shares / Assets
889  
889  
889  
(520,932)
(508,975) 
(513,475) 
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement
(1,990,546) 
(1,265,514) 
(2,033,342) 
Foreign Loans
120,000  
123,632  
300,000  
Consolidated Fund balance as on 1 January
(357,234) 
(532,969) 
(797,993) 
Local Loans
1,429,787  
976,368  
1,800,000  
1,072,553  
443,399  
1,002,007  
Consolidated Fund balance as on 31 December 
(797,993) 
(698,483) 
(731,335) 
   Consolidated Fund Surplus / (Deficit)
(1,469,614) 
(756,539) 
(1,519,867) 
201,684  
(36,861) 
(25,133) 
(1,267,930) 
(793,400) 
(1,545,000) 
13,054,927
13,351,390
13,964,140
-5.9%
Actual 
Revised
-11.1%
   General Government Adjustments 
   General Government Surplus / (Deficit) 
   Gross Domestic Product
General Government Surplus /(Deficit) 
as a % of Gross Domestic Product
-9.7%
FISCAL POSITION 2020 - 2021
2020
2021
€ '000
€ '000
€ '000
Approved
tabelli_2020_24_budget speech as amended 10_10_21
10/10/2021   16:19
99
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
TAX REVENUE
Direct  -     
Income Tax
1,793,000,000
1,772,295,000
- 
20,705,000 
Lower revenue is anticipated by year end, when
compared to the original budget, as shown in the
revised forecast based on revenue trends.
Social Security
1,087,000,000
1,161,436,000
74,436,000 
- 
Excess revenue under Social Security Contributions is
expected to materialise in reflection of employment
performance.
Indirect -  
Customs and Excise Duties
344,000,000
306,200,000
- 
37,800,000 
Lower revenue is anticipated by year-end, when
compared to the original budget, as shown in the
revised forecast as a result of lower receipts mainly
under Machine-made Cigarettes and Petroleum .
Licences, Taxes and Fines
381,000,000
331,725,000
- 
49,275,000 
Lower revenue is expected by year end mainly under
Duty on Documents and Motor Vehicle Registration
Tax .
Value Added Tax
994,000,000
898,944,000
- 
95,056,000 
Lower revenue is anticipated by year end, when
compared to the original budget, as shown in the
revised forecast.
4,599,000,000
4,470,600,000
128,400,000
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2021 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
TOTAL TAX REVENUE
VARIATION
100
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
NON-TAX REVENUE
122,041,000
103,641,000
- 
18,400,000
Lower revenue is anticipated by year-end, when
compared to the original budget, as shown in the
revised forecast as a result of lower receipts under the 
Individual Investor Programme , Fee on Caging of
Bluefin Tuna , Environmental Contribution and Energy 
Performance  Certificates .
42,096,000
42,096,000
- 
- 
4,573,000
4,613,000
40,000
- 
33,000,000
33,000,000
- 
- 
33,680,000
33,680,000
- 
- 
Reimbursements
Central Bank of Malta
Rents
Sales
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2021 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
Fees of Office
101
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
NON-TAX REVENUE (continued)
44,100,000
50,000,000
5,900,000
- 
The revised forecast reflects the actual dividends which
are expected to materialise.
276,000
276,000
- 
- 
263,503,000
212,740,000
- 
50,763,000
Variance
is
due
to
actual
reimbursements
of
corresponding expenditure, expected to be received
from the EU Commission under its various funding
programmes.
55,733,000
58,733,000
3,000,000
- 
Higher receipts are expected to materialise by year-end
under Proceeds from Auctioning of Emission Trading
Units . However, lower revenue is expected under
Premium receivable from Sale of MGSs .
599,002,000
538,779,000
60,223,000
5,198,002,000
5,009,379,000
188,623,000
Dividends on Investment
STATEMENT  A
Interest on Loans made by Government  
REVENUE 2021 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
TOTAL REVENUE
Grants
TOTAL NON-TAX REVENUE
Miscellaneous Receipts
VARIATION
102
HEAD
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
NON-ORDINARY REVENUE
976,368,000
1,800,000,000
823,632,000
- 
The difference from the original estimates reflects
higher borrowing requirements for this year, mainly
due to the impact of the pandemic.
123,632,000
300,000,000
176,368,000
- 
The revision reflects financing obtained through EU
SURE Loans.
2,226,000
2,226,000
- 
- 
889,000
889,000
- 
- 
1,103,115,000
2,103,115,000
1,000,000,000
6,301,117,000
7,112,494,000
811,377,000
VARIATION
Local Loans
GRAND TOTAL
TOTAL NON-ORDINARY 
REVENUE
European Union Loan
Proceeds from Sale of Shares
Repayment of loans made by Government
STATEMENT  A
REVENUE 2021 : REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
103
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
1 Office of the President
4,714,000
4,862,000
148,000
- 
2 House of Representatives
10,472,000
10,415,000
-
57,000
3 Office of the Ombudsman
1,427,000
1,427,000
-
- 
4 National Audit Office
3,850,000
3,850,000
-
- 
5 Commissioner for Standards in Public 
Life
478,000
478,000
-
- 
6 Office of the Prime Minister
59,355,000
62,864,000
3,509,000
- 
Variance
is
expected
under
Personal
Emoluments
(Salaries and Wages and Allowances ) and under the
Contributions to Government Entities category mainly to
cover services being provided by Servizz.gov.
7 Information
1,438,000
1,417,000
-
21,000
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
104
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
8 Government Printing Press
1,730,000
1,738,000
8,000
- 
9 Electoral Office
2,666,000
2,850,000
184,000
- 
10 Public Service Commission
770,000
693,000
-
77,000
11 Industrial and Employment Relations
1,948,000
2,061,000
113,000
- 
12 Ministry for Health
758,174,000
896,302,000
138,128,000
- 
Variance is due to higher expenditure under Personal
Emoluments
(Salaries
and
Wages ,
Allowances
and
Overtime ), under the category for Operational and
Maintenance Expenses as well as under Programmes and
Initiatives
(Medicines
and
Surgical
Materials , 
Maintenance of Medical Equipment , Waiting Lists of
Medical
Services )
due
to
the
COVID-19
pandemic,
National Strategy on Rare Diseases , Health Concession
Agreement - Gozo General Hospital , Health Concession
Agreement - Karin Grech Rehabilitation Hospital
and
Cancer Treatment .
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
105
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
13 Ministry for Foreign and European 
Affairs
45,048,000
47,293,000
2,245,000
- 
Savings
are
projected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category (Salaries and Wages and Allowances ), which
partly compensate for increases under the Operational
and
Maintenance
Expenses
category
(Rent
and
Contractual
Services ),
as
well
as
the
Overseas 
Development Aid , under the Programmes and Initiatives
category .
14 Ministry for Senior Citizens and Active 
Ageing
202,911,000
200,528,000
-
2,383,000
Savings
are
expected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category under Salaries and Wages and Overtime which 
will compensate for an increase under Allowances due.  
An
expected
decrease
under
Contractual
Services
compensates for an increase of SVPR Service Contract
under
the
Programmes
and
Initiatives
Category.
Furthermore,
lower
expenditure
under
the
Welfare
Committee within this Vote resulted following transfer of
the allocated budget to another recurrent vote.
15 Ministry for Research, Innovation and 
the Coordination of Post COVID-19 
Strategy
16,195,000
16,622,000
427,000
- 
VARIATION
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
106
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
16 Ministry for the National Heritage, the 
Arts and Local Government
49,115,000
58,181,000
9,066,000
- 
Savings
are
expected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category in reflection of expenditure trends.
Higher
expenditure is expected under Culture Assistance Fund
(COVID-19)
under
the
Programmes
and
Initiatives
category following the issue of such assistance scheme.
Supplementary provisions are required under Heritage 
Malta
within
Contributions
to
Government
Entities
category to make good for lower revenue from ticket
sales.
17 Local Government
54,916,000
54,851,000
-
65,000
18 Ministry for Transport, Infrastructure 
and Capital Projects
102,069,000
107,614,000
5,545,000
- 
Increases are projected in the Personal Emoluments
category (Salaries and Wages and Allowances) , as well as
the Operational and Maintenance Expenses
category 
(Contractual
Services
and
Professional
Services).
In 
response to actual requirements, supplementary funding
is also required under Damages to Third Parties, Grant for
Wheelchair Accessible Vehicles, Scrappage Scheme to
Purchase Motor Cycles, Public Service Obligation - Public
Transport and Grant for Electric Vehicles.
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
107
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
19 Ministry for Social Justice and 
Solidarity, the Family and Children's 
Rights
66,897,000
70,343,000
3,446,000
- 
A supplementary provision is required under the Welfare
Committee (whilst an equivalent amount will be unspent
under another Vote) and Out of Home Care Programme
which partly take up expected decreases under Adoption 
Grant and Public Social Partnerships.
20 Social Policy
371,082,000
390,544,000
19,462,000
- 
A decrease is expected under Salaries and Wages in the
Personal Emoluments category. Higher expenditure is
required in State Contribution under the Programmes
and Initiatives category in reflection of higher social
security contributions expected to be received.
21 Social Security Benefits
1,118,069,000
1,118,069,000
-
- 
22 Pensions
103,490,000
103,490,000
-
- 
VARIATION
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
108
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
23 Ministry for Justice, Equality and 
Governance
40,051,000
44,129,000
4,078,000
- 
A decrease in the Personal Emoluments category under
Salaries and Wages partly compensates for an increase in
provisions under Summoning and Expenses of Witnesses,
Jurors and Experts in Criminal Court Trials in the category
of
Programmes
and
Initiatives,
and
under
the
Contributions to Government Entities category (Court 
Services Agency , Office of the State Advocate
and
Attorney General's Office) .
24 Ministry or Agriculture, Fisheries, Food 
and Animal Rights
32,189,000
40,141,000
7,952,000
- 
Supplementary provisions are required in the Personal
Emoluments category (Salaries and Wages and Social 
Security
Contributions )
under
the
Operational
and
Maintenance Expenses category (Contractual Services and
Professional Services ), as well as Agriculture Support
Scheme and Animal Aftercare Clinic which partly take up
saving under the Storm Damages Scheme item.
25 Ministry for Social Accommodation
28,888,000
29,888,000
1,000,000
- 
Additional funds are required under Housing Programmes
in reponse to assistance being requested.
26 Ministry for Education
311,862,000
311,751,000
-
111,000
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
STATEMENT B
VARIATION
109
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
27 Education
330,966,000
353,892,000
22,926,000
- 
A variance is expected under Personal Emoluments
(Salaries and Wages ) and under the Programmes and
Initiatives category to cover the Extension of School
Transport Network due to resulting actual demand.
28 Ministry for the Economy and Industry
88,040,000
125,462,000
37,422,000
- 
Savings
are
expected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category under Salaries and Wages. Higher expenditure is
expected under Contractual Services of the Operational
and Maintenance Expenses category and under Malta 
Freeport Interest Payments ( whilst an equivalent amount
will remain unspent under the Ministry for Tourism and
Consumer Protection) and Tech.mt of the Programmes 
and Initiatives category. Lower expenditure is expected
under Economic Regeneration Voucher Scheme of the
same category.
Supplementary provisions are required
under
Lands
Authority
and
Malta
Investments
Management
Co.
Ltd .
within
the
Contributions
to
Government Entities category.
29 Commerce
1,634,000
1,854,000
220,000
- 
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
110
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
30 Ministry for Inclusion and Social 
Wellbeing
47,990,000
52,314,000
4,324,000
- 
Higher expenditure is expected under Sports Activities and 
Assitance to Organisations and Independent Community
Living under the Programmes and Initiatives category.
Supplementary provisions are required under Office of
the Commissioner for Voluntary Organisations - due to
recruitment, and Malta Council for the Voluntary Sector
within Contributions to Government Entities category -
due to pandemic assistance offered to the Sector.
31 Ministry for the Environment, Climate 
Change and Planning
72,632,000
70,372,000
-
2,260,000
Savings
are
expected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category under Salaries and Wages, Social Security
Contributions
and Allowances .
Additional funding is
required under Solid Waste Management Strategy in
Programmes and Initiatives category and Environment 
and Planning Review Tribunal within Contributions to
Government Entities category.
32 Ambjent Malta
6,599,000
15,770,000
9,171,000
- 
Additional funds are required under Salaries and Wages
of
the Personal
Emoluments category
which partly
compensate for the variance under Landscaping-Malta, in 
respect of which an equivalent amount will remain
unspent under the Ministry for Energy, Enterprise and
Sustainable Development.
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
111
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
33 Ministry for Gozo
51,734,000
52,340,000
606,000
- 
Additional
funds
are
projected
in
the
Personal
Emoluments category (Salaries and Wages) and under
Operational
and
Maintenance
Expenses
category
(Contractual Services) which partly compensate to the
decrease
in
Gozo
Employment
Scheme
under
the
Programmes and Initiatives category. 
34 Ministry for Home Affairs, National 
Security and Law Enforcement
57,577,000
68,208,000
10,631,000
- 
Supplementary funding is required under Salaries and 
Wages
and Allowances
of the Personal Emoluments
category, Contractual Services of the Operational and
Maintenance Expenses category, Detention Services of the
Programmes and Initiatives category and under the
Correctional Services Agency and Agency for Welfare of
Asylum Seekers
in the Contributions to Government
Entities category.
35 Armed Forces of Malta
58,299,000
73,735,000
15,436,000
- 
A variance is expected under the Personal Emoluments
category (Salaries and Wages and Allowances), as a result
of collective agreement arrears falling due.
36 Police
82,780,000
82,330,000
-
450,000
The overall variance under the Personal Emoluments
category
(Salaries
and
Wages,
and
Allowances)
is
expected to materialise by year end, in reflection of
expenditure trends.  
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
112
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
37 Probation and Parole
1,456,000
1,464,000
8,000
- 
38 Civil Protection
9,906,000
11,887,000
1,981,000
- 
Additional funds are required under Allowances in the
Personal Emoluments category, due to a new collective
agreement.
39 Ministry for Tourism and Consumer 
Protection
149,989,000
145,693,000
-
4,296,000
The Personal Emoluments category (Salaries and Wages
and Allowances ), the Programmes and Initiatives category
(Malta Freeport Interest Payments) in respect of which the 
equivalent amount will be spent under the Ministry for
the Economy and Industry and the Contributions to
Government Entities category (Malta Tourism Authority ) 
are expected to give rise to the indicated variance under
this recurrent vote by year end.
40 Ministry for Energy, Enterprise and 
Sustainable Development
249,374,000
469,247,000
219,873,000
- 
The Programmes and Initiatives category (Pandemic 
Assistance Schemes as well as Landscaping Malta), in
respect of which equivalent amount will be spent under
Ambjent Malta) and Engineering Resources Ltd in the
Contributions to Government Entities Category, are likely
to give rise to this budget variance by year end.
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
STATEMENT B
113
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
41 Ministry for Finance and Employment
304,598,000
370,775,000
66,177,000
- 
Additional
funds
will
be
required
in
the
Personal
Emoluments
category
under
Salaries
and
Wages,
Professional Services of the Operational and Maintenance
Expenses
category
and
under
EU
Own
Resources , 
Childcare for All
and Court Judgements
under the
Programmes and Initiatives Category.
Supplementary
provisions
are
required
under
Financial
Intelligence
Analysis Unit within the Contributions to Government
Entities category.
42 Economic Policy
1,807,000
1,874,000
67,000
- 
43 Treasury
35,654,000
33,701,000
-
1,953,000
Lower
net
expenditure
is
expected
under
the
Programmes and Initiatives category.
44 Public Debt Servicing
706,877,000
682,630,000
-
24,247,000
Expenditure under Local Borrowing will be lower than
originally forecast in view of Interest (MGS) and Total
Sinking Funds Contributions.
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
114
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€ 
€
€
€
45 Commissioner for Revenue
20,813,000
20,771,000
-
42,000
46 Customs
12,716,000
12,647,000
-
69,000
47 Contracts
2,031,000
1,930,000
-
101,000
TOTAL RECURRENT EXPENDITURE AND 
PUBLIC DEBT SERVICING
5,683,276,000
6,231,297,000
548,021,000
- 
STATEMENT B
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE 2021: REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
VARIATION
115
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
I Office of the President
554,000
554,000
-
-
II House of Representatives
2,176,000
1,676,000
-
500,000
Expenditure in relation to Rehabilitation and Adaptation
Works  is expected to be lower.
III Office of the Prime Minister
53,326,000
50,673,000
-
2,653,000
Savings are projected mainly under Structural Funds 201-
4-2020  and Internal Security Fund - Borders and Visa . 
IV Ministry for Health
66,053,000
53,029,000
-
13,024,000
The
higher
expenditure
under
ICT
Items ,
Direct 
Management
Funds
and
EEA/Norwegian
Financial
Mechanisms
2014-2021
will
be
offset
by
lower
expenditure under Structural Funds 2014-2020
and
Property, Plant and Equipment (Mount Carmel Hospital) .
V Ministry for Foreign and European 
Affairs
2,905,000
10,196,000
7,291,000
-
Higher expenditure is expected under Property, Plant
and Equipment to cater for the acquisition of a property
in New York.
VI Ministry for Senior Citizens and 
Active Ageing
9,483,000
8,970,000
-
513,000
Higher expenditure is foreseen under Property, Plant and
Equipment (Saint Vincent de Paul Residence)
and
Property, Plant and Equipment (Existing Homes) which is
expected to be partly compensated for by lower
expenditure
under
Property,
Plant
and
Equipment
(Birkirkara Home) .
STATEMENT C
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2021:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
116
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
VII Ministry for Research, Innovation 
and the Coordination of Post 
COVID-19 Strategy
1,590,000
1,590,000
-
-
VIII Ministry for the National Heritage, 
the Arts and Local Government
29,354,000
21,582,000
-
7,772,000
Savings are anticipated under Structural Funds 2014-
2020 , Concert Hall  and Local Councils Capital Projects .
IX Ministry for Transport, 
Infrastructure and Capital Projects
163,245,000
230,696,000
67,451,000
-
Expenditure is projected to be higher under Structural 
Funds 2014-2020 , Connecting Europe Facility 2014-2020 , 
Road Construction/Improvements , Maritime Facilities , 
Ta' Qali National Park and Corradino Rubgy Complex . 
This is partially offset by lower expenditure that is
anticipated under the Cohesion Fund 2014-2020 .
X Ministry for Social Justice and 
Solidarity, the Family and 
Children's Rights
4,199,000
8,509,000
4,310,000
-
Higher expenditure is anticipated under Property, Plant
and Equipment (Ministry) , Structural Funds 2014-2020
and Property, Plant and Equipment (Foundation for Social
Welfare Standards) .
XI Ministry for Justice, Equality and 
Governance
4,263,000
3,698,000
-
565,000
Savings under Court Services Agency  are expected.
STATEMENT C
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2021:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
117
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
XII Ministry for Agriculture, Fisheries, 
Food and Animal Rights
41,238,000
41,238,000
-
-
XIII Ministry for Social Accommodation
3,941,000
7,941,000
4,000,000
-
Higher expenditure is anticipated under Property, Plant
and Equipment .
XIV Ministry for Education
88,207,000
73,177,000
-
15,030,000
Expenditure is anticipated to be lower under Structural 
Funds 2014-2020 , MCAST Capital Programme , and
Information Technology in Government Schools .
XV Ministry for the Economy and 
Industry
39,633,000
50,911,000
11,278,000
-
Higher expenditure is anticipated under Structural Funds
2014-2020 , and Lands Authority Capital Programme . 
XVI Ministry for Inclusion and Social 
Wellbeing
27,624,000
13,252,000
-
14,372,000
Savings are expected to materialise under Structural 
Funds 2014-2020 , REACH - Independent Living and
Employment , and Sports Capital Programme.
XVII Ministry for  the Environment, 
Climate Change and Planning
47,328,000
34,430,000
-
12,898,000
Savings are projected under Waste Management and
Cohesion Fund 2014-2020 .
STATEMENT C
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2021:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
118
VOTE
APPROVED
REVISED
VARIATION
REMARKS
ESTIMATE
ESTIMATE
+
-
€
€
€
€
XVIII Ministry for Gozo
22,007,000
30,043,000
8,036,000
-
Additional expenditure is expected to be incurred mainly
under
Property,
Plant
and
Equipment,
Road 
Construction/Improvements,
Upgrading of St Francis
Square  and Gozo Aquatic Centre. 
XIX Ministry for Home Affairs, National 
Security and Law Enforcement
62,602,000
42,130,000
-
20,472,000
Expenditure is expected to be lower principally under ICT 
Items  and Armed Forces of Malta Capital Programme . 
XX Ministry for Tourism and Consumer 
Protection
20,436,000
17,176,000
-
3,260,000
Savings
are
anticipated
under
the
Foundation for
Tourism Zones.
XXI Ministry for Energy, Enterprise and 
Sustainable Development
76,712,000
70,644,000
-
6,068,000
Lower expenditure under Cohesion Fund 2014-2020 and
Parks Malta Capital Programme will be partly offset by
higher expenditure under Property, Plant and Equipment
and Structural Funds 2014-2020.
XXII Ministry for Finance and 
Employment
36,479,000
42,424,000
5,945,000
-
Expenditure is expected to be higher mainly under
Investment - Equity Acquisition , Structural Funds 2014-
2020 , Direct Management Funds
and the Customs 
Capital Programme .
TOTAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
803,355,000
814,539,000
11,184,000
- 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 2021:  REVISED ESTIMATES COMPARED TO APPROVED ESTIMATES
STATEMENT C
